On one axis, you have more hardware coming in. On the other hand, you have an explosion of
innovation in AI. And so what happened with both TensorFlow and PyTorch is that the explosion
of innovation in AI has led to, it's not just about matrix multiplication and convolution,
these things have now like 2,000 different operators. And on the other hand, you have,
I don't know how many pieces of hardware there are out there, it's a lot.
Part of my thesis, part of my belief of where computing goes, if you look at 10 years from now,
is it's not going to get simpler. Physics isn't going back to where we came from.
It's only going to get weirder from here on out. And so to me, the exciting part about what we're
building is it's about building that universal platform, which the world can continue to get
weird, because again, I don't think it's avoidable, it's physics. But we can help lift people scale,
do things with it, and they don't have to rewrite their code every time a new device comes out.
And I think that's pretty cool.
The following is a conversation with Chris Latner, his third time on this podcast.
As I've said many times before, he's one of the most brilliant engineers in modern computing,
having created LLM Compiler Infrastructure Project, the Klang Compiler, the Swift programming
language, a lot of key contributions to TensorFlow and TPUs as part of Google.
He served as vice president of autopilot software at Tesla, was a software innovator
and leader at Apple, and now he co-created a new full stack AI infrastructure for distributed
training, inference, and deployment on all kinds of hardware called Modular, and a new
programming language called Mojo, that is a superset of Python, giving you all the usability of
Python, but with the performance of C++. In many cases, Mojo code has demonstrated over
30,000 x speed up over Python. If you love machine learning, if you love Python,
you should definitely give Mojo a try. This programming language, this new AI framework,
and infrastructure, and this conversation with Chris is mind blowing. I love it.
It gets pretty technical at times, so I hope you hang on for the ride. This is the Lex
Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description,
and now, dear friends, here's Chris Lattner. It's been, I think, two years since we last
talked, and in that time, you somehow went and co-created a new programming language called Mojo.
So it's optimized for AI. It's a superset of Python. Let's look at the big picture. What is
the vision for Mojo? For Mojo? Well, I think you have to zoom out. So I've been working on a lot
of related technologies for many, many years. So I've worked on LVM, and a lot of things, and
mobile, and servers, and things like this. But the world's changing. And what's happened with
AI is we have new GPUs, and new machine learning accelerators, and other ASICs, and things like
that that make AI go real fast. At Google, I worked on TPUs. That's one of the biggest,
largest scale deployed systems that exist for AI. And really what you see is if you look across
all of the things that are happening in the industry, there's this new compute platform
coming. And it's not just about CPUs, or GPUs, or TPUs, or NPUs, or IPUs, or whatever,
all the PUs. It's about how do we program these things. And so for software folks like us,
it doesn't do us any good if there's this amazing hardware that we can't use.
And one of the things you find out really quick is that having the theoretical capability of
programming something, and then having the world's power and the innovation of all the
smart people in the world get unleashed on something can be quite different. And so really
where Mojo came from was starting from a problem of we need to be able to take machine learning,
take the infrastructure underneath it, and make it way more accessible, way more usable,
way more understandable by normal people and researchers and other folks that are not
themselves like experts in GPUs and things like this. And then through that journey,
we realize, hey, we need syntax for this, we need to do a program language.
So one of the main features of the language, I say so fully in jest, is that it allows you to have
the file extension to be an emoji, or the fire emoji, which is one of the first emojis used
as a file extension I've ever seen in my life. And then you ask yourself the question, why in
the 21st century, are we not using Unicode for file extensions? This I mean, it's an epic decision.
I think clearly the most important decision you made the most, but you could also just use Mojo
as the file extension. Well, so okay, so take a step back. I mean, come on, Lex, do you think that
the world's ready for this? This is a big moment in the world, right? This is we're releasing this
onto the world. This is innovation. I mean, it really is kind of brilliant. Emojis are such a
big part of our daily lives. Why isn't it not in programming? Well, and like you take a step back
and look at what file extensions are, right? They're basically metadata, right? And so why are
we spending all the screen space on them and all this stuff? Also, you know, you have them stacked
up next to text files and PDF files and whatever else, like, if you're gonna do something cool,
you want to stand out, right? Emojis are colorful, they're visual, they're beautiful, right?
What's been the response so far from, is there support on like Windows on operating systems
in displaying like File Explorer? Yeah, the one problem I've seen is that Git doesn't escape it
right? And so it thinks that the Fire Emoji is unprintable. And so it like prints out weird
hex things if you use the command line Git tool. But everything else as far as I'm aware works
fine. And I have faith that Git can be improved. So GitHub is fine. GitHub is fine. Yep. GitHub is
fine. Visual Studio Code, Windows, like all this stuff totally ready, because people have
internationalization in their normal part of their paths. So this is just like taking the next step,
right? Somewhere between, oh, wow, that makes sense. Cool. I like new things too. Oh my god,
you're killing my baby. Like, what are you talking about? This can never be like, I can never hand
it and list how am I going to type this like all these things. And so this is something where I
think that the world will get there. We don't have to bet the whole farm on this. I think we can
provide both paths. But I think it'll be great. When can we have emojis as part of the code? I
wonder. Yeah, so I mean, lots of languages provide that. So I think that we have partial support
for that. It's probably not fully done yet. But but yeah, you can you can do that. For example,
in Swift, you can do that for sure. So an example we give gave it Apple was the dog cow. Yeah,
so that's a classical Mac heritage thing. And so you use the dog and the cow emoji together.
And that could be your variable name. But of course, the internet went and made
pile of poop for everything. Yeah. So you know, if you want to name your function pile of poop,
then you can totally go to town and see how that gets through code review.
Okay, so let me just ask a bunch of random questions. So is Mojo primarily designed for
AIs? Or is it a general purpose program? Good question. So it's AI first. And so AI is driving
a lot of the requirements. And so modular is building and designing and driving Mojo forward.
And it's not because it's an interesting project theoretically to build, it's because we need it.
And so modular, we're really tackling the AI infrastructure landscape and the big problems
in AI, and the reasons that it is so difficult to use and scale and adopt and deploy and like all
these big problems in AI. And so we're coming out from that perspective. Now, when you do that,
when you start tackling these problems, you realize that the solution to these problems
isn't actually an AI specific solution. And so while we're doing this, we're building Mojo to
be a fully general programming language. And that means that you can obviously tackle GPUs and CPUs
and like these AI things, but it's also a really great way to build NumPy and other things like
that or you know, just if you look at what many Python libraries are today, often they're a layer
of Python for the API, and they end up being C and C++ code underneath them. That's very true in AI,
that's true in lots of other demands as well. And so anytime you see this pattern,
that's an opportunity for Mojo to help simplify the world and help people have one thing.
To optimize through simplification, by having one thing. So you mentioned modular. Mojo is
the programming language, modular is the whole software stack. So just over a year ago, we started
this company called modular. What modular is about is it's about taking AI and up leveling it
into the next generation. And so if you take a step back, what's gone on in the last five, six,
seven, eight years is that we've had things like TensorFlow and PyTorch and these other systems
come in, you've used them, you know this. And what's happened is these things have grown like crazy,
and they get tons of users, it's in production deployment scenarios, it's being used to power
so many systems. AI is all around us now. It used to be controversial years ago, but now it's a
thing. But the challenge with these systems is that they haven't always been thought out with
current demands in mind. So you think about it, where were LLMs eight years ago? Well, they didn't
exist, right? AI has changed so much. And a lot of what people are doing today are very different
than when these systems were built. And meanwhile, the hardware side of this has gotten into a huge
mess. There's tons of new chips and accelerators and every big company's announcing a new chip every
day it feels like. And so between that, you have like this moving system on one side, moving system
on the other side, and it just turns into this gigantic mess, which makes it very difficult for
people to actually use AI, particularly in production deployment scenarios. And it's what
modular students were helping build out that software stack to help solve some of those problems.
So then people can be more productive and get more AI research into production.
Now, what Mojo does is it's a really, really, really important piece of that. And so that is,
you know, part of that engine and part of the technology that allows us to solve these problems.
So Mojo is a programming language that allows you to do a high level program and the low level
programming, they do all kinds of programming in that spectrum that gets you closer and closer
to the hardware. So take a step back. So Lex, what do you love about Python?
Oh boy. Where do I begin? What is love? What do I love about Python?
You're a guy who knows love. I know this. Yes. How intuitive it is.
How it feels like I'm writing natural language, English.
How when I can not just write but read other people's code somehow I can understand it faster.
It's more condensed than other languages like ones I'm really familiar with like C++
and C. There's a bunch of sexy little features. Yeah. We'll probably talk about some of them,
but list comprehensions and stuff like this. Also, and don't forget the entire ecosystem
of all the packages. Oh yeah, that's probably huge. Because there's always something. If you want to do
anything, there's always a package. Yeah. So it's not just the ecosystem of the packages
and the ecosystem of the humans that do it. That's a really, that's an interesting dynamic.
That's good. Because I think something about the usability and the ecosystem makes the thing viral.
It grows and then it's a virtuous cycle, I think. Well, there's many things that went into that.
Like, so I think that ML was very good for Python. And so I think that TensorFlow and
PyTorch and these systems embracing Python really took and helped Python grow. But I think that the
major thing underlying it is that Python is like the universal connector. It really helps bring
together lots of different systems so you can compose them and build out larger systems without
having to understand how it works. But then what is the problem with Python? Well, I guess you
could say several things, but probably that it's slow. I think that's usually what people complain
about. And so other people complain about tabs in spaces versus curly braces or whatever. But
those people are just wrong because it is actually just better to use an indentation.
Wow, strong words. So actually, I'm a small tangent. Let's actually take that. Let's take
all kinds of tangents. Oh, come on, Lex. You can push me on it. I could take it.
Design. Listen, I've recently left Emacs for VS Code. The kind of hate mail I had to receive.
Because on the way to doing that, I also said I've considered Vim and chose not to and went with
VS Code. You're touching on deep religions, right? Anyway, tabs is an interesting design decision.
And so you've really written a new programming language here. Yes, it is a superset of Python,
but you can make a bunch of different interesting decisions here. Totally. And you chose actually
to stick with Python in terms of some of the syntax. So let me explain why. So
I mean, you can explain this in many rational ways. I think that the indentation is beautiful,
but that's not a rational explanation. But I can defend it rationally. So first of all,
Python 1 has millions of programmers. It's huge. It's everywhere. It owns machine learning. So
factually, it is the thing, right? Second of all, if you look at it, C codes, C++ code, Java,
whatever, Swift, curly brace languages also run through formatting tools and get indented.
And so if they're not indented correctly, first of all, it will twist your brain around.
It can lead to bugs. There's notorious bugs that have happened across time where the indentation
was wrong or misleading and it wasn't formatted, right? And so it turned into an issue, right?
And so what ends up happening in modern large-scale code bases is people run automatic formatters.
So now what you end up with is indentation and curly braces. Well, if you're going to have
the notion of grouping, why not have one thing, right? And get rid of all the clutter and have
a more beautiful thing, right? Also, you look at many of these languages, it's like, okay, well,
you can have curly braces or you can omit them if there's one statement or you just enter this
entire world of complicated design space that objectively you don't need if you have Python
style indentation. So yeah, I would love to actually see statistics on errors made because
of indentation. Like how many errors are made in Python versus in C++ that have to do with basic
formatting, all that kind of stuff. I would love to see. I think it's probably pretty minor because
once you get like, you use VS code, I do too. So if you get VS code set up, it does the indentation
for you generally. Right. And so you don't, you know, it's actually really nice to not have to
fight it. And then what you can see is the editor is telling you how your code will work by indenting
it, which I think is pretty cool. I honestly don't think I've ever, I don't remember having an error
in Python because I indented stuff wrong. So I mean, I think that there's, again, this is a religious
thing. And so I can joke about it. And I love, I love to kind of, you know, I realize that this is
such a polarizing thing and everybody wants to argue about it. And so I like poking at the bear
a little bit, right? But, but frankly, right, come back to the first point, Python one,
like it's huge, it's an AI, it's the right thing. For us, like we see mojo as being an incredible
part of the Python ecosystem, we're not looking to break Python or change it or quote unquote,
fix it. We love Python for what it is. Our view is that Python is just not done yet.
And so if you look at, you know, you mentioned Python being slow, well, there's a couple of
different things that go into that, which we can talk about if you want. But one of them is it just
doesn't have those features that you would use to do C like programming. And so if you say, okay,
well, I'm forced out of Python into C for certain use cases. Well, then what we're doing is we're
saying, okay, well, why, why is that? Can we just add those features that are missing from Python back
up to mojo? And then you can have everything that's great about Python, all the things you're talking
about the love, plus not be forced out of it when you do something a little bit more computationally
intense or weird or hardwarey or whatever it is that you're doing.
Well, a million questions. I want to ask what high level again, is it compiled or is it an
interpretive language? So Python is just in time compilation. What's, what's mojo?
So mojo, the complicated answer does all the things. So it's interpreted, it's just compiled
and it's statically compiled. And so this is for a variety of reasons. So one of the things that
makes Python beautiful is that it's very dynamic. And because it's dynamic, one of the things they
added is that it has this powerful metaprogramming feature. And so if you look at something like
PyTorch or TensorFlow, or, or, I mean, even a simple, simple use case, like you'd find a class
that has the plus method, right, you can overload the Dunder methods like Dunder add, for example,
and then the plus method works on your class. And so it has very nice and very expressive,
dynamic metaprogramming features. In mojo, we want all those features come in. Like,
we don't want to break Python, we want it all to work. But the problem is, is you can't run those
super dynamic features on an embedded processor, or on a GPU, right? Or if you could, you probably
don't want to just because of the performance. And so we entered this question of saying,
okay, how do you get the power of this dynamic metaprogramming into a language that has to be
super efficient in specific cases? And so what we did was we said, okay, we'll take that interpreter,
Python has an interpreter in it, right, take that interpreter and allow it to run it compile time.
And so now what you get is you get compile time metaprogramming. And so this is super
interesting, super powerful, because one of the big advantages you get is you get Python style
expressive APIs, you get the ability to have overloaded operators. And if you look at what
happens inside of like PyTorch, for example, with automatic differentiation and eager mode,
and like all these things, they're using these really dynamic and powerful features at runtime.
But we can take those features and lift them so that they run at compile time.
So you're, because C++ has metaprogramming with templates, but it's really messy.
It's super messy. It's always, it was accidentally, I mean, different people have different
interpretations. My interpretation is that it was made accidentally powerful. It was not designed
to be terrain complete, for example, but that was discovered kind of along the way accidentally.
And so there have been a number of languages in the space. And so they usually have templates
or code instantiation, code copying features of various sorts.
Some more modern languages, or some more newer newer languages, let's say, like, you know,
they're fairly unknown, like zig, for example, says, okay, well, let's take all of those types
so you can run it, all those things you can do at runtime and allow them to happen at compile time.
And so one of the problems with C++, I mean, which is one of one of the problems with C++
Here we go. Wrong words. We're going to offend everybody today.
Oh, it's okay. I mean, everybody hates me for a variety of reasons. Anyways, I'm sure, right?
I've written enough the way they show love. I've written enough C++ code to earn a little bit
of grumpyness with C++. But, but one of the problems with it is that the metaprogramming
system templates is just a completely different universe from the normal runtime programming
world. And so if you do metaprogramming and programming, it's just like a different universe,
different syntax, different concepts, different stuff going on. And so again, one of our goals
with Mojo is to make things really easy to use, easy to learn. And so there's a natural stepping
stone. And so as you do this, you say, okay, well, I have to do programming at runtime,
after you're programming at compile time. Why are these different things?
How hard is that to pull it out? Because that sounds to me as a fan of metaprogramming in C++
even. How hard is it to pull that off? That sounds really, really exciting, because you can do the
same style programming at compile time and at runtime. That's really, really exciting.
Yep. And so I mean, in terms of the compiler implementation details, it's hard. I won't be
shy about that. It's super hard. It requires, I mean, what Mojo has underneath the covers is a
completely new approach to the design of the compiler itself. And so this builds on these
technologies like MLIR that you mentioned, that also includes other like caching and other
interpreters and jit compilers and other stuff like that.
Do you have like an interpreter inside the compiler?
Within the compiler, yes. And so it really takes the standard model of programming languages and
kind of twists it and unifies it with the runtime model, right, which I think is really cool. And
to me, the value of that is that, again, many of these languages have metaprogramming features,
like they grow macros or something, right? You list, right?
Yes.
I know your roots, right? And this is a powerful thing, right? And so if you go back to list,
one of the most powerful things about it is that it said that the metaprogramming and the programming
are the same, right? And so that made it way simpler, way more consistent, way easier to
understand reason about, and it made it more composable. So if you build a library, you can use
it both at runtime and compile time, which is pretty cool.
Yeah. And for machine learning, I think metaprogramming, I think we could generally say is extremely
useful. And so you get features, I mean, I'll jump around, but there's the feature of auto-tuning
and adaptive compilation just blows my mind.
Yeah. Well, so, okay, so let's come back to that.
Okay, all right.
So what is machine learning? Like, what is a machine learning model? Like,
you take a PyTorch model off there, right? It's really interesting to me because what
PyTorch and what TensorFlow and all these frameworks are kind of pushing compute into,
is they're pushing into like this abstract specification of a compute problem,
which then gets mapped in a whole bunch of different ways, right?
And so this is why it became a metaprogramming problem, is that you want to be able to say,
cool, I have this neural net, now run with batch size 1000, right? Do a mapping across batch,
or okay, I want to take this problem now running across 1000 CPUs or GPUs, right?
And so like, this problem of like, describe the compute and then map it and do things and
transform it are like, actually, it's very profound. And that's one of the things that
makes machine learning systems really special.
Maybe can you describe auto-tuning and how do you pull off? I mean, I guess adaptive
compilation is what we're talking about as metaprogramming.
Yeah.
How do you pull off auto-tuning? I mean, is that as profound as I think it is? It just seems like
I really like, you know, we'll mention list comprehensions to me, from a quick glance at
Mojo, which by the way, I have to absolutely like dive in. As I realize how amazing this is,
I absolutely must dive in. That looks like just an incredible feature for machine learning people.
Yeah. Well, so what is auto-tuning? So take a step back. Auto-tuning is a feature in Mojo.
It's not, so very little of what we're doing is actually research. Like many of these ideas
have existed in other systems and other places. And so what we're doing is we're pulling together
good ideas, remixing them, and making them into hopefully a beautiful system, right?
And so auto-tuning, the observation is that it turns out hardware systems, algorithms are really
complicated. It turns out maybe you don't actually want to know how the hardware works,
right? A lot of people don't, right? And so there are lots of really smart hardware people.
I know a lot of them, where they know everything about, okay, that the cache size is this and
the number of registers is that. And if you use this, what length of vector, it's going to be
super efficient because it maps directly onto what it can do. And like all this kind of stuff,
or the GPU has SMs and it has a warp size of whatever, right? All the stuff that goes into
these things or the tile size of a TPU is 128, like these factoids, right? My belief is that
most normal people, and I love hardware people also, I'm not trying to offend literally everybody
on the internet, but most programmers actually don't want to know this stuff, right? And so if
you come at it from the perspective of how do we allow people to build both more abstracted,
but also more portable code, because, you know, could be that the vector length changes or the
cache size changes, or it could be that the tile size of your matrix changes or the number,
you know, an A100 versus an H100 versus a Volta versus a whatever GPU have different
characteristics, right? A lot of the algorithms that you run are actually the same, but the
parameters, these magic numbers you have to fill in end up being really fiddly numbers that an
expert has to go figure out. And so what autotuning does, it says, okay, well, guess what? There's
a lot of compute out there, right? So instead of having humans go randomly try all the things or
do a grid search or go search some complicated multi-dimensional space, how about we have
computers do that, right? And so what autotuning does is you can say, hey, here's my algorithm.
If it's a matrix operation or something like that, you can say, okay, I'm going to
carve it up into blocks. I'm going to do those blocks in parallel. And I want this with 128 things
that I'm running on, I want to cut it this way or that way or whatever. And you can say, hey, go see
which one's actually empirically better on the system. And then the result of that, you cache for
that system. Yep. You save it. And so come back to twisting your compiler brain, right? So not only
does the compiler have an interpreter that's used to do metaprogramming, that compiler that
interpreter that metaprogramming now has to actually take your code and go run it on a target
machine. See which one likes the best and then stitch it in and then keep going, right? So part
of the compilation is machine specific. Yeah. Well, so I mean, this is an optional feature, right?
So you don't have to use it for everything. But yeah, if you're, so one of, one of the things
that we're in the quest of is ultimate performance. Yes. Right. And ultimate performance is important
for a couple of reasons, right? So if you're an enterprise, you're looking to save cost and compute
and things like this, ultimate performance translates to, you know, fewer servers. Like,
if you care about the environment, hey, better performance leads to more efficiency. Right?
I mean, you could joke and say like, you know, Python's bad for the environment.
Right. And so if you move to Mojo, it's like at least 10x better just out of the box and
keep going, right? But, but performance is also interesting because it leads to better products.
And so in the space of machine learning, right, if you reduce the latency of a model,
so it runs faster. So every time you query the server running the model, it takes less time.
Well, then the product team can go and make the model bigger. Well, that's actually makes it,
so you have a better experience as a customer. And so a lot of people care about that.
So for auto tuning, for like tile size, you mentioned 128 for TPU, you would specify like a
bunch of options to try. Just in the code. It's just a simple statement. And then you just set
and forget and know, depending on where it compiles, it'll actually be the fastest.
And yeah, exactly. And the beauty of this is that it helps you in a whole bunch of different
ways, right? So if you're building, so often what'll happen is that, you know, you've written a
bunch of software yourself, right? You, you wake up one day, you say, I have an idea,
I'm going to go code up some code. I get to work. I forget about it. I move on with life. I come
back six months or a year or two years or three years later, you dust it off and you go use it
again in a new environment. And maybe your GPU is different. Maybe you're running on a server
instead of a laptop, maybe whatever, right? And so the problem now is you say, okay, well,
I mean, again, not everybody cares about performance. But if you do, you say, okay,
well, I want to take advantage of all these new features. I don't want to break the old thing,
though. Right. And so the typical way of handling this kind of stuff before is, you know, if you're
talking about C++ templates, or you're talking about C with macros, you end up with if deaths,
you get like all these weird things get layered in, make the code super complicated. And then how
do you test it? Right? Because this crazy complexity, multi-dimensional space you have to
worry about. And, you know, that just doesn't scale very well. Actually, let me just jump around
before I go to some specific features. Like the increase in performance here that we're talking
about can be just insane. You write that Moja can provide a 35,000 x speed up over Python.
How does it do that? Yeah, so it can even do more. But we'll get to that. So first of all,
when we say that we're talking about what's called C Python, it's the default Python that
everybody uses when you type Python three, that's like typically the one you use, right? C Python is
an interpreter. And so interpreters, they have an extra layer of like byte codes and things like this
that they have to go read, parse, interpret and make some kind of slow from that perspective.
And so one of the first things we do is we move to a compiler. And so I'm just moving to a compiler
getting the interpreter out of the loop is two to five to 10 x speed up depending on the code.
So just out of the gate, just using more modern techniques, right? Now, if you do that, one of
the things you can do is you can start to look at how C Python started to lay out data. And so one
of the things that C Python did, and this isn't part of the Python spec necessarily, but this is
sets of decisions, is that if you take an integer, for example, it'll put it in an object. In Python,
everything's an object. And so they do the very logical thing of keeping the memory representation
of all objects the same. So all objects have a header, they have like payload data. And what this
means is that every time you pass around an object, you're passing around a pointer to the data.
Well, this has overhead. It turns out that modern computers don't like chasing pointers very much
in things like this. It means that you have to allocate the data. It means you have to reference
count it, which is another way that Python uses to keep track of memory. And so this has a lot
of overhead. And so if you say, okay, let's try to get that out of the heap, out of a box, out of
an indirection, and into the registers. That's that's another 10 x. So it adds up if you if
you're reference counting every single every single thing you create that adds up. Yep. And
if you look at, you know, people complain about the Python Gil, this is one of the things that
hurts parallelism. That's because the reference counting. Right. And so the Gil and reference
counting are very tightly intertwined in Python. It's not the only thing, but it's very tightly
intertwined. And so then you lean into this and you say, okay, cool, well, modern computers, they
can do more than one operation at a time. And so they have vectors. What is a vector? Well, a vector
allows you to take one, instead of taking one piece of data doing an ad or a multiply and then
pick up the next one, you can now do four or eight or 16 or 32 at a time. Right. Well, Python
doesn't expose that because of reasons. And so now you can say, okay, well, you can adopt that.
Now you have threads. Now you have like additional things like you can control memory
hierarchy. And so what mojo allows you to do is it allows you to start taking advantage of
all these powerful things have been built into the hardware over time. And it gives
the library gives very nice features. So you can say, just parallelize, let's do this in parallel.
So it's very, very powerful weapons against slowness, which is why people have been I think
having fun like just taking code and making go fast because it's just kind of an adrenaline rush
to see like how fast you can get things. Before I talk about some of the interesting
stuff with parallelization, all that, let's first talk about like the basics. We talked
about indentation, right? So this thing looks like Python. It's sexy and beautiful like Python,
as I mentioned. Is it a typed language? So what's the role of types?
Yeah, good question. So Python has types. It has strings as integers, it has dictionaries and
like all that stuff. But they all live at runtime. Right. And so because all those types live at
runtime and Python, you never, you don't have to spell them. Python also has like this whole
typing thing going on now. And a lot of people use it. Yeah, I'm not talking about that. That's
kind of a different thing. We can go back to that if you want. But, but typically the,
you know, you just say I take, I have a def and my def takes two parameters. I'm going to call them
A and B and I don't have to write a type. Okay. So that is great. But what that does is that forces
what's called a consistent representation. So these things have to be a pointer to an object
with the object header, and they all have to look the same. And then when you dispatch a method,
you go through all the same different paths, no matter what the receiver or whatever that type
is. So what Mojo does is it allows you to have more than one kind of type. And so what it does
is allows you to say, okay, cool, I have, I have an object and objects behave like Python does. And
so it's fully dynamic and that's all great. And for many things classes, like that's all very
powerful and very important. But if you want to say, Hey, it's an integer, and it's 32 bits or 64
bits or whatever it is, or it's a floating point value, it's 64 bits. Well, then the compiler can
take that and it can use that to do way better optimization. And it turns out again, getting
rid of the interactions, that's huge, means you can get better code completion because you have,
because compiler knows what the type is. And so it knows what operations work on it. And so that's
actually pretty huge. And so what Mojo does allows you to progressively adopt types into your program.
And so you can start again, it's compatible with Python. And so then you can add however many types
you want, wherever you want them. And if you don't want to deal with it, you don't have to deal with
it. Right. And so one of one of, you know, our opinions on this is it's not that types are the
right thing or the wrong thing. It's that they're a useful thing.
Which was kind of optional. It's not strict typing, you don't have to specify type.
Exactly. Okay, so starting from the thing that Python is kind of reaching towards right now with
trying to inject types into it. Yeah, with a very different approach. But yes.
What's the different approach? I'm actually one of the people
that have not been using types very much in Python.
That's okay. Why did you say?
It just, well, because I know the importance it's like adults use strict typing. And so I refuse
to grow up in that sense. It's a kind of rebellion. But I just know that it probably reduces the
amount of errors even just for forget about performance improvements, it probably reduces
errors when you do strict typing. Yeah, so I mean, I think it's interesting if you look at that,
right? And the reason I'm giving a hard time is that there's this cultural norm, this pressure,
this like, there has to be a right way to do things. Like, you know, grown-ups only do it one
way. And if you don't do that, you should feel bad. Right. Like some people feel like Python's a
guilty pleasure or something. And it's like, when it gets serious, I need to go rewrite it.
I mean, cool. I understand history and I understand kind of where this comes from. But
I don't think it has to be guilty pleasure. Yeah. So if you look at that, you say,
why do you have to rewrite it? Well, you have to rewrite it to deploy. Well, why do you want to
deploy? Well, you care about performance, you care about productivity, or you want, you know,
a tiny thing on the server that has no dependencies, or, you know, you have
objectives that you're trying to attain. So what if Python can achieve those objectives?
So if you want types, well, maybe you want types because you want to make sure you're
passing the right thing. Sure, you can add a type. If you don't care, you're prototyping some stuff,
you're hacking some things out, you're like pulling some MAM code off the internet,
it should just work. Right. And you shouldn't be like pressured. You shouldn't feel bad
about doing the right thing or the thing that feels good. Now, if you're in a team, right,
you're working at some massive internet company and you have 400 million lines of Python code,
well, they may have a house rule that you use types. Yeah. Right. Because it makes it easier
for different humans to talk to each other and understand what's going on and bugs at scale.
Right. And so there are lots of good reasons why you might want to use types. But that doesn't
mean that everybody should use them all the time. Right. So what Mojo does is it says, cool, well,
allow people to use types. And if you use types, you get nice things out of it. Right. You get
better performance and things like this. Right. But Mojo is a full compatible superset of Python.
Right. And so that means it has to work without types. It has to support all the dynamic things,
has to support all the packages, has to support for comprehension, list comprehensions and things
like this. Right. And so that starting point, I think, is really important. And I think that,
again, you can look at why it cares so much about this. And there's many different aspects of that,
one of which is the world went through a very challenging migration from Python 2 to Python 3.
Right. And this migration took many years. And it was very painful for many teams. Right.
And there's a lot of things that went on in that. I'm not an expert in all the details. I honestly
don't want to be. I don't want the world to have to go through that. Right. And people can ignore
Mojo. And if it's not their thing, that's cool. But if they want to use Mojo, I don't want them
to have to rewrite all their code. Yeah. I mean, this, okay, the superset part is,
it's just, I mean, there's so much brilliant stuff here. That definitely is incredible.
We'll talk about that. Yeah. First of all, how's the typing implemented differently
in Python versus Mojo? Yeah. So this heterogeneous flexibility,
you said, is definitely implemented. Yeah. So I'm not a full expert in the whole
backstory on types in Python. So I'll give you that. I can give you my understanding.
My understanding is basically like many dynamic languages, the ecosystem went through a phase
where people went from ranked scripts to ranked large scale, huge code bases in Python. And at
scale, it kind of helps have types. Yeah. People want to be able to reason about interfaces,
what do you expect to string or an int or like, what are these basic things, right?
And so what the Python community started doing is it started saying, okay, let's have tools on the
side, checker tools, right? The go and like enforce and variance, check for bugs, try to
identify things. These are called static analysis tools generally. And so these tools run over
your code and try to look for bugs. What ended up happening is there's so many of these things,
so many different weird patterns and different approaches on specifying the types and different
things going on that the Python community realized and recognized, hey, hey, hey, there's a thing here.
And so what they started to do is they started to standardize the syntax for adding types to Python.
Now, one of the challenges that they had is that they're coming from kind of this fragmented
world where there's lots of different tools, they have different trade-offs and interpretations
and the types mean different things. And so if you look at types in Python, according to the
Python spec, the types are ignored, right? So according to the Python spec, you can write
pretty much anything in a type position, okay? And technically, you can write any expression,
okay? Now, that's beautiful because you can extend it, you can do cool things, you can
write, build your own tools, you can build your own house, linter or something like that, right?
But it's also a problem because any existing Python program may be using different tools
and they have different interpretations. And so if you adopt somebody's package into your ecosystem,
try around the tool you prefer, it may throw out tons of weird errors and warnings and problems
just because it's incompatible with how these things work. Also because they're added late
and they're not checked by the Python interpreter, it's always kind of more of a hint than it is a
requirement. Also, the C Python implementation can't use them for performance. And so it's really
that's a big one, right? So you can't utilize the for the compilation for the just entire
compilation. Okay, exactly. And this all comes back to the design principle of it's,
it's kind of, they're kind of hints, they're kind of the definition is a little bit murky,
it's unclear exactly the interpretation in a bunch of cases. And so because of that, you can't
actually, even if you want to, it's really difficult to use them to say like it is going
to be an int. And if it's not, it's a problem, right? A lot of code would break if you did that.
So, so in mojo, right, so you can still use those kind of type annotations, it's fine.
But in mojo, if you declare a type and you use it, then it means it is going to be that type.
And the compiler helps you check that and force it and it's safe. And it's not it's not a like
best effort hint kind of a thing. So if you try to shove a string type thing into a integer,
you get an error from the compiler, compile time. Nice. Okay, what kind of basic types are there?
Yeah, so mojo is pretty hardcore in terms of what it tries to do in the language,
which is the philosophy there is that we, again, if you, if you look at Python, right,
Python's beautiful language because it's so extensible, right? And so all of the different
things in Python like for loops and plus and like all these things can be
accessed through these underbar and bar methods. Okay, so you have to say, okay,
if I make something that is super fast, I can go all the way down to the metal.
Why do I need to have integers built into the language?
Right. And so what mojo does is it says, okay, well, we can have this notion of structs. So
we have classes in Python, now you can have structs. Classes are dynamic, structs are static.
Cool, we can get high performance, we can write C++ kind of code with structs if you want.
These things mix and work beautifully together. But what that means is that you can go and
implement strings and ints and floats and arrays and all that kind of stuff in the language.
Right. And so that's really cool because, you know, to me as a ideal, idealizing compiler language
type of person, what I want to do is I want to get magic out of the compiler and put in the
libraries. Because if somebody can, you know, if we can build an integer that's beautiful and it
has an amazing API and does all the things you'd expect an integer to do, but you don't like it,
maybe you want a big integer, maybe you want like sideways integer, I don't know, like what
all the space of integers are, then you can do that and it's not a second class citizen.
And so if you look at certain other languages like C++, one I also love and use a lot,
int is hard code in the language, but complex is not. And so it's kind of weird that, you know,
you have this std complex class, but you have int and complex tries to look like a natural
numeric type and things like this. But integers and floating point have these like special promotion
rules and other things like that that are magic and they're hacked into the compiler.
And because of that, you can't actually make something that works like the built-in types.
Is there something provided as a standard because, you know, because it's AI first,
you know, numerical types are so important here. So is there something like a nice
standard implementation of integer and float? Yeah, so we're still building all this stuff out. So we
provide integers and floats and all that kind of stuff. We also provide like buffers and tensors
and things like that that you'd expect in an ML context. Honestly, we need to keep designing and
redesigning and working with the community to build that out and make that better. That's not
our strength right now. Give us six months or a year and I think it'll be way better. But
the power of putting in the library means that we can have teams of experts that aren't compiler
engineers that can help us design and refine and drive us forward. So one of the exciting things
we should mention here is that this is new and fresh. This cake is unbaked. It's almost baked.
You can tell it's delicious, but it's not fully ready to be consumed. Yep, that's very fair. It is
very useful, but it's very useful if you're a super low-level programmer right now. And what
we're doing is we're working our way up the stack. And so the way I would look at Mojo
today in May and 2023 is that it's like a 0.1. So I think that a year from now,
it's going to be way more interesting to a variety of people. But what we're doing is we
decided to release it early so that people can get access to it and play with it. We can build
it with the community. We have a big roadmap fully published, being transparent about this,
and a lot of people are involved in this stuff. And so what we're doing is we're really optimizing
for building this thing the right way. And building it the right way is kind of interesting
working with the community because everybody wants it yesterday. And so sometimes there's
some dynamics there, but I think it's the right thing. So there's a discord also,
so the dynamics is pretty interesting. Sometimes the community probably can be very chaotic
and introduce a lot of stress. Guido famously quit over the stress of the Walrus operator.
Broke, straw the brook with camels there. Exactly. And so it could be very stressful to
develop. But can you just add tangent upon a tangent? Is it stressful to work through the
design of various features here given that the community is so racially involved?
Well, so I've been doing open development and community stuff for decades now. Somehow this
has happened to me. So I've learned some tricks. But the thing that always gets me is I want to
make people happy. And so this is maybe not all people all happy all the time. But generally,
I want people to be happy. And so the challenge is that, again, we're tapping into some long,
some deep-seated long tensions and pressures both in the Python world, but also in the AI world,
in the hardware world, and things like this. And so people just want us to move faster.
And so, again, our decision was let's release this early. Let's get people used to it or access to
and play with it. And let's build in the open, which we could have had the language monk sitting
in the cloister up on the hilltop bevaring away trying to build something. But in my experience,
you get something that's way better if you work with the community.
And so, yes, it can be frustrating. It can be challenging for lots of people involved. And
if you mention our Discord, we have over 10,000 people on the Discord, 11,000 people or something.
Keep in mind, we released Mojo like two weeks ago. So it's very cool. But what that means is that
10, 11,000 people all will want something different. And so what we've done is we've tried to say,
okay, cool, here's our roadmap. And the roadmap isn't completely arbitrary. It's based on,
here's the logical order in which to build these features or add these capabilities and
things like that. And what we've done is we've spun really fast on bug fixes. And so we actually
have very few bugs, which is cool. I mean, actually for projects in the state. But then
what we're doing is we're dropping in features very deliberately.
I mean, this is fun to watch because you got the two gigantic communities of like hardware,
like systems engineers. And then you have the machine learning Python people that are like
higher level. And it's just too like army, like they've been at war. Yeah, they've been at war.
Right. And so here's a Tolkien novel or something. Okay, so here's the test. Again,
like it's super funny for something that's only been out for two weeks, right? People are so
impatient, right? But okay, cool. Let's fast forward a year. Like any year's time, Mojo will be
actually quite amazing and solve tons of problems and be very good. People still have these problems.
Right. And so you look at this and you say, and the way I look at this at least is to say,
okay, well, we're solving big longstanding problems. To me, I, again, working on many
different problems, I want to make sure we do it right. Right? There's like a responsibility you
feel because if you mess it up, right? There's very few opportunities to do projects like this
and have them really have impact on the world. If we do it right, then maybe we can take those
feuding armies and actually heal some of those wounds. Yeah, this is like, this feels, this
feels like a speech by George Washington or Abraham Lincoln or something. And you look at
this and it's like, okay, well, how different are we? Yeah. We all want beautiful things. We all
want something that's nice. We all want to be able to work together. We all want our stuff to be
used, right? And so if we can help heal that, now I'm not optimistic that all people will use Mojo
and they'll stop using C++. Like that's not my goal, right? But if we can heal some of that,
I think that'd be pretty cool. Yeah. And we start by putting the people who like braces into the
gulag. No. So there are proposals for adding braces to Mojo. We just tell them no. Okay.
Politely. Yeah. Anyway, so there's a lot of amazing features on the roadmap and those ready
to implement it. It'd be awesome. I can just ask you a few things. So the other performance
improvement comes from immutability. So what's the what's this var and this let thing that we got
going on? What's immutability? Yeah. So one of the things that is useful and it's not always
required, but it's useful is knowing whether something can change out from underneath you.
Right. And so in Python, you have a pointer to an array, right? And so you pass that pointer
to an array around to things. If you pass into a function, maybe take that and scroll away in
some other data structure. And so you get your array back and you go to use it. Now somebody else
is like putting stuff in your array. How do you reason about that? Because to be very
complicated, at least a lot of bugs, right? And so one of the things that, you know, again,
this is not something Mojo forces on you, but something that Mojo enables is a thing called
value semantics. And what value semantics do is they take collections like arrays, like dictionaries,
also tensors and strings and things like this that are much higher level and make them behave
like proper values. And so it makes it look like if you pass these things around, you get a logical
copy of all the data. And so if I pass you an array, sure array, you can go do what you want
to it. You're not going to hurt my array. Now, that is an interesting and very powerful design
principle. It defines the way a ton of bugs. You have to be careful to implement it in an efficient
way. Yeah, is there a performance hit that's significant? Generally not, if you implement it
the right way. But it requires a lot of very low level, getting the language right bits.
I assume there'll be a huge performance hit, because it's a really nice, the benefit is really
nice, because you don't get into the complex. Absolutely. Well, the trick is, is you can't do
copies. So you have to provide the behavior of copying without doing the copy. Yeah. How do you
do that? How do you do that? It's not magic. It's just, it's actually pretty cool. Well,
so first, before we talk about how that works, let's talk about how it works in Python, right?
So in Python, you define a person class, or maybe a person class is a bad idea. You define a
database class, right? And database class has an array of records, something like that, right?
And so the problem is that if you pass in a record or a class instance into the database,
it'll take a hold of that object. And then it assumes it has it. And if you're passing an object in,
you have to know that that database is going to take, take it. And therefore you shouldn't change
it after you put in the database, right? This is, this is kind of have to know that you just
have to kind of know that, right? And so you roll out version one of the database, you just kind
of have to know that. Of course, Lex uses his own database, right? Yeah, right? Because you built
it, you understand this works, right? Somebody else joins the team, they don't know this. Yes.
Right. And so now they suddenly get bugs, you're having to maintain the database, you shake your
fist, you argue the 10th time this happens, you're like, okay, we have to do something different.
Right. And so what you do is you go change your Python code, and you change your database
class to copy the record every time you add it. And so what ends up happening is you say, okay,
I will do what's called a defensive copy inside the database. And then that way,
if somebody passes something in, I will have my own copy of it. And they can go do whatever,
and they're not going to break my thing. Okay, this is usually the, the two design patterns.
If you look in PyTorch, for example, this is cloning a tensor, like there's a specific thing,
and you have to know where to call it. And if you don't call in the right place,
you get these bugs, and this is state of the art. Right. So a different approach. So it's used in
many languages. So I worked with it in Swift, as you say, okay, well, let's provide value semantics.
And so we want to provide the view that you get a logically independent copy. But we want to do
that lazily. And so what we do is you say, okay, if you pass something into a function, it doesn't
actually make a copy. What it actually does is it just increments a reference to it. And if you
pass it around, you stick in your database, you can go into the database, you own it. And then
you come back out of the stack, nobody's copied anything, you come back out of the stack, and
then the caller, let's go of it. Well, then you've just handed it off to the database,
you've transferred it, and there's no copies made. Now, on the other hand, if, you know,
your coworker goes and hands you a record, and you pass it in, you stick it in the database,
and then you go to town, and you start modifying it, what happens is you get a copy lazily
on demand. And so what this does, this gives you copies only when you need them.
And it also, so it defines the way the bugs, but it also generally reduces the number of copies
in practice. And so the implementation details are tricky here. Yes. So this is, yes, something
with reference counting, but to make it performant across the number of different kinds of
objects. Yeah, so you need a couple of things. And so there's many, so this concept has existed
in many different worlds. And so, again, it's not novel research at all, right? The magic is
getting the design right so that you can do this in a reasonable way, right? And so there's a number
of components that go into this. One is when you're passing around, so we're talking about
Python and reference counting at the expense of doing that, when you're passing values around,
you don't want to do extra reference counting for no good reason. And so you have to make
sure that you're efficient and you transfer ownership instead of duplicating references
and things like that, which is a very low level problem. You also have to adopt this and you have
to build these data structures. And so if you say, you know, Mojo has to be compatible with Python.
So of course, the default list is a reference semantic list that works the way you'd expect
in Python. But then you have to design a value semantic list. And so you just have to implement
that and then you implement the logic within. And so the role of the language here is to provide
all the low level hooks that allow the author of the type to be able to get and express this
behavior without forcing it into all cases or hard coding this into the language itself.
But there's ownership. So you're constantly transferring, you're tracking who owns the thing.
Yes. And so there's a whole system called ownership. And so this is related to work done
in the Rust community. Also the Swift community has done a bunch of work. And there's a bunch of
different other languages that evolve kind of C++ actually has copy constructors and destructors
and things like that. And so I mean, C++ has everything. So it has move constructors and
has like this whole world of things. And so this is a body of work that's kind of been developing
for many, many years now. And so Mojo takes some of the best ideas out of all these systems and
remixes it in a nice way so that you get the power of something like the Rust programming language.
But you don't have to deal with it when you don't want to, which is a major thing in terms of
teaching and learning and being able to use and scale these systems.
How does that play with argument conventions? What are they? Why are they important?
How does the value semantics? How does the transfer ownership work with the arguments
when they're passed into functions? So if you go deep into systems programming land,
so this isn't again, this is not something for everybody, but if you go deep into systems
programming land, what you encounter is you encounter these types that get weird.
So if you're used to Python, you think about everything, I can just copy it around,
I can go change it and mutate it and do these things. And it's all cool.
If you get into systems programming land, you get into these things like I have an atomic number,
or I have a mutex, or I have a uniquely owned database handle, things like this, right?
So these types, you can't necessarily copy. Sometimes you can't necessarily even move them
to a different address. And so what Mojo allows you to do is it allows you to express,
hey, I don't want to get a copy of this thing. I want to actually just get a reference to it.
And by doing that, well, you can say, as you can say, okay, if I'm defining something weird,
like a atomic number or something, it has to be, so an atomic number is an area in memory
that multiple threads can access at a time without locks. And so the definition of atomic
numbers, multiple different things have to be poking it. Therefore, they have to agree on where
it is. And so you can't just move it out from underneath one because it kind of breaks what
it means. And so that's an example of a type that you can't copy, you can't move. Once you create,
it has to be where it was. Now, if you look at many other examples, like a database handle,
so okay, well, what happens, how do you copy a database handle? Do you copy the whole database?
That's not something you necessarily want to do. There's a lot of types like that
where you want to be able to say that they are uniquely owned. So there's always one of this
thing. And or if I create a thing, I don't copy it. And so what Mojo allows you to do is it allows
you to say, hey, I want to pass around a reference to this thing without copying it. And so it has
borrowed conventions. So you can say, you can use it, but you don't get to change it. You can pass
it by mutable reference. And so if you do that, then you can, you get a reference to it, but
you can change it. And so it manages all that kind of stuff. So it's just a really nice implementation
of like C++ has, you know, the different kinds of pointers, different kinds of applications,
smart pointers that you can explicitly define this logic. But you're saying that's more like
the weird case versus the common case. Well, it depends on where, I mean, I mean,
I don't think I'm a normal person. So I mean, I'm not one to call other people weird.
But the, but, you know, if you talk to a normal Python, a typical Python programmer,
you're typically not thinking about this, right? This is a lower level of abstraction. Now,
if you talk to a C++ programmer, certainly if you talk to a Rust programmer, again, they're
not weird, they're delightful, like these are all good people, right? Those folks will think about
all the time. Right. And so I look at this as there's a spectrum between very deep low level
systems. I'm going to go poke the bits and care about how they're laid out in memory all the
way up to application and scripting and other things like this. And so it's not that anybody's
right or wrong. It's about how do we build one system that scales? By the way, the idea of an
atomic number has been something that always brought me deep happiness. Because the flip side
of that, the idea that threads can just modify stuff asynchronously, just the whole idea of
concurrent programming is a source of infinite stress for me. Well, so this is where you jump into,
you know, again, you zoom out and get out of programming languages or compilers and you just
look at what the industry has done. My mind is constantly blown by this, right? And you look
at what, you know, Moore's law, Moore's law has this idea that like computers for a long time,
single thread performance has got faster and faster and faster and faster for free.
But then physics and other things intervened and power consumption, like other things started
to matter. And so what ended up happening is we went from single core computers to multi core,
then we went to accelerators, right? And this trend towards specialization of hardware
is only going to continue. And so for years, us programming language nerds and compiler people
have been saying, okay, well, how do we tackle multi core, right? For a while, it was like,
multi core is the future, we have to get on top of this thing. And then it was multi cores to default.
What are we doing with this thing? And then it's like, there's chips with hundreds of cores in them.
What happened, right? And so I'm super inspired by the fact that, you know, in the face of this,
you know, those machine learning people invented this idea of a tensor, right? And what is a tensor?
A tensor isn't like an arithmetic and algebraic concept, it's like an abstraction around a
gigantic parallelizable data set, right? And because of that, and because of things like
TensorFlow and PyTorch, we're able to say, okay, we'll express the math of the system.
This enables you to do automatic differentiations, enables you to do like all these cool things.
And it's an abstract representation. Because you have that abstract representation,
you can now map it onto these parallel machines without having to control, okay, put that right
here, put that right there, put that right there. And this has enabled an explosion in terms of AI,
compute, accelerators, like all the stuff. And so that's super, super excited.
What about the deployment, the execution across multiple machines? So you write that
the modular compute platform dynamically partitions models with billions of parameters
and distributes their execution across multiple machines, enabling unparalleled efficiency.
By the way, the use of unparalleled in that sentence, anyway, enabling unparalleled efficiency
scale and reliability for the largest workloads. So how do you do this abstraction of distributed
deployment of large models? Yeah, so one of the really interesting
tensions. So there's a whole bunch of stuff that goes into that. I'll pick a random walkthrough.
If you go back and replay the history of machine learning, right? I mean, the brief,
the most recent history of machine learning, because this is, as you know, very deep.
I knew Lex when he had an AI podcast. So if you look at just TensorFlow and PyTorch,
which is pretty recent history in the big picture, right? But TensorFlow is all about graphs.
PyTorch, I think, pretty unarguably ended up winning. And why did it win? Mostly because
of usability, right? And the usability of PyTorch is, I think, huge. And I think, again,
that's a huge testament to the power of taking abstract theoretical technical concepts and bring
it to the masses, right? Now, the challenge with what the TensorFlow versus the PyTorch
design points was that TensorFlow is kind of difficult to use for researchers, but it was
actually pretty good for deployment. PyTorch is really good for researchers. It kind of
not super great for deployment, right? And so I think that we as an industry have been struggling.
And if you look at what deploying a machine learning model today means is that you'll have
researchers who are, I mean, wicked smart, of course, but they're wicked smart at model architecture
and data and calculus. They're wicked smart in various domains. They don't want to know anything
about the hardware or deployment or C++ or things like this, right? And so what's happened is you
get people who train the model, they throw it over the fence, and then you have people that
try to deploy the model. Well, every time you have a team A does X, they throw it over the fence,
and team B does Y, you have a problem. Because, of course, it never works the first time.
And so you throw it over the fence, they figure out, okay, it's too slow, won't fit,
doesn't use the right operator, the tool crashes, whatever the problem is, then they have to throw
it back over the fence. And every time you throw a thing over a fence, it takes three weeks of
project managers and meetings and things like this. And so what we've seen today is that getting
models in production can take weeks or months. Like it's not atypical, right? I talked to lots
of people and you talk about like VP of software at some internet company trying to deploy a model,
and they're like, why do I need a team of 45 people? It's so easy to train a model, why can't I
deploy it, right? And if you dig into this, every layer is problematic. So if you look at the language
piece, I mean, this is tip of the iceberg. It's a very exciting tip of the iceberg for folks, but
you've got Python on one side and C++ on the other side. Python doesn't really deploy. I mean,
can theoretically, technically in some cases, but often a lot of production teams will want to get
things out of Python because they get their performance and control and whatever else. So
Mojo can help with that. If you look at serving, so you talk about gigantic models, well, a gigantic
model won't fit on one machine, right? And so now you have this model, it's written Python, it has
to be rewritten in C++. Now it also has to be carved up so that half of it runs on one machine,
half of it runs on another machine, or maybe it runs on 10 machines. So now suddenly, the complexity
is exploding, right? And the reason for this is that if you look into TensorFlow, PyTorps, these
systems, they weren't really designed for this world, right? They were designed for, you know,
back in the day when we were starting and doing things where it was a different, much simpler
world, like you want to run ResNet 50 or some ancient model architecture like this. It was just a,
it was a completely different world.
Trained on 1GPU. Exactly.
Doing some 1GPU.
Yeah, AlexNet, right? The major breakthrough. And the world has changed, right? And so now the
challenge is that TensorFlow, PyTorps, these systems, they weren't actually designed for
LLMs. That was not a thing. And so where TensorFlow actually has amazing power in terms of scale and
deployment and things like that. And I think Google is, I mean, maybe not unmatched, but they're
incredible in terms of their capabilities and gigantic scale. Many researchers using PyTorps,
right? And so PyTorps doesn't have those same capabilities. And so what Modular can do is
it can help with that. Now, if you take a step back and say like, what is Modular doing, right?
So Modular has like a bitter enemy that we're fighting against in the industry. And it's one
of these things where everybody knows it, but nobody is usually willing to talk about it.
The bitter enemy.
The bitter thing that we have to destroy, that we're all struggling with, and it's like fish
can't see water, is complexity. Sure. Yes. It's complexity. That was very close.
And so if you look at it, yes, it is on the hardware side. Yes.
All these accelerators, all these software stacks that go with the accelerator,
all these massive complexity over there. You look at what's happening on the modeling side,
massive amount of complexity. Like things are changing all the time. People are inventing,
turns out the research is not done, right? And so people want to be able to move fast.
Transformers are amazing, but there's a ton of diversity even within transformers. And what's
the next transformer, right? And you look into serving also huge amounts of complexity. It turns
out that all the cloud providers, right, have all their very weird, but very cool hardware for
networking and all this kind of stuff. And it's all very complicated. People aren't using that.
You look at classical serving, right? There's this whole world of people who know how to write
high-performance servers with zero-copy networking and like all this fancy,
asynchronous I.O. and like all these fancy things in the serving community,
very little that has pervaded into the machine learning world, right? And why is that? Well,
it's because, again, these systems have been built up over many years. They haven't been
rethought. There hasn't been a first principles approach to this. And so what Modular's doing is
we're saying, okay, we've built many of these things. So I've worked on TensorFlow and TPUs
and things like that. Other folks on our team have worked on PyTorch core. We've worked on
Onyx one time. We've worked on many of these other systems. And so systems like the Apple
accelerators and all that kind of stuff, our team is quite amazing. And so one of the things that
roughly everybody at Modular's grumpy about is that when you're working on one of these projects,
you have a first order goal, get the hardware to work, get the system to enable one more model,
get this product out the door, enable this specific workload or solve this problem for
this product team, right? And nobody's been given a chance to actually do that step back.
And so we as an industry, we didn't take two steps forward. We took like 18 steps forward
in terms of all this really cool technology across compilers and systems and runtimes and
heterogeneous computing, like all this kind of stuff. And like all this technology has been,
you know, I wouldn't say beautifully designed, but it's been proven in different quadrants.
Like, you know, you look at Google with TPUs, massive, huge exoflops of compute strapped
together into machines that researchers are programming in Python in a notebook.
That's huge. That's amazing. That's incredible, right? It's incredible. And so you look at the
technology that goes into that. And the algorithms are actually quite general. And so
lots of other hardware out there and lots of other teams out there don't have the sophistication
or maybe the years working on it or the budget or whatever that Google does, right? And so
they should be getting access to the same algorithms, but they just don't have that, right?
And so what Modular's doing is we're saying, cool, this is not research anymore. Like, we've built
auto tuning in many systems. We've built programming languages, right? And so like have,
have, you know, implemented C++ have implemented Swift have implemented many of these things.
And so, you know, it's hard, but it's not research. And you look at accelerators. Well,
we know there's a bunch of different weird kind of accelerators, but they actually cluster together,
right? And you look at GPUs. Well, there's a couple of major vendors of GPUs, and they maybe
don't always get along, but their architectures are very similar. You look at CPUs. CPUs are
still super important for the deployment side of things. And you see new, new architectures coming
out from all the cloud providers and things like this, and they're all super important
to the world, right? But they don't have the 30 years of development that the entrenched people
do, right? And so what Modular can do is we're saying, okay, all this complexity, like, it's not,
it's not bad complexity. It's actually innovation, right? And so it's innovation that's happening.
And it's for good reasons. But I have sympathy for the poor software people, right? I mean, again,
I'm generally a software person too, I love hardware. But software people want to build
applications and products and solutions that scale over many years. They don't want to build a
solution for one generation of hardware with one vendor's tools. Right? And because of this,
they need something that scales with them, they need something that works on cloud and mobile,
right? Because, you know, their product manager said, Hey, I want to be at have lower latency,
it's better for personalization or whatever they decide, right? Products evolve. And so
the challenge with the machine learning technology and the infrastructure we have today,
in the industry, is that it's all these point solutions. And because they're all these point
solutions, it means that as your product evolves, you have to like switch different technology
stacks or switch to different vendor. And what that does is that slows down progress.
So basically, a lot of the things we've developed in those little silos for machine learning tasks,
you want to make that the first class citizen of a general purpose programming language,
they can then be compiled across all these kinds of hardware.
Well, so it's not really about a programming language. I mean, the program language is a
component of the mission, right? And the mission is are not literal, but our joking mission is to
save the world from terrible AI software. Excellent. Okay. So, so, you know, if you look at this
mission, you need a syntax. So that's the so yeah, she need a program language, right? And and like,
we wouldn't have to build the programming language if one existed. Right? So if Python was already
good enough, then cool, we would just used it, right? We're not just doing very large scale
expensive engineering projects for the sake of it, like, it's to solve a problem, right? It's also
about accelerators. It's also about exotic numerics and b-float 16 and matrix multiplications and
convolutions and like this, this kind of stuff. Within the stack, there are things like kernel
fusion. It's a esoteric but really important thing that leads to much better performance
and much more general research hackability together, right? And that's enabled by the ASICS,
that's enabled by certain hardware. So it's like, where's the dance between
I mean, there's several questions here, like, how do you add a piece of hardware to this stack?
Yeah. If you need pieces, like if I have this genius invention of a specialized accelerator,
how do I add that to the modular framework? And also, how does modular as a standard
start to define the kind of hardware that should be developed?
Yeah. So let me take a step back and talk about status quo. Okay. And so if you go back to TensorFlow
1, PyTorch 1, this kind of timeframe, and these have all evolved and gotten way more
complicated. So let's go back to the glorious simple days, right? These things basically were CPUs and
CUDA. And so what you do is you say, go do a dense layer and a dense layer has a matrix
multiplication, right? And so when you say that, you say, go do this big operation,
a matrix multiplication. And if it's on a GPU, kick off CUDA kernel, if it's on a CPU, go do
like an Intel algorithm or something like that with the Intel MKL. Okay.
Now, that's really cool. If you're either video or Intel, right? But then more hardware comes in.
Right. And on one axis, you have more hardware coming in. On the other hand, you have
an explosion of innovation in AI. And so what happened with both TensorFlow and PyTorch is that
the explosion of innovation in AI has led to, it's not just about matrix multiplication and
convolution. These things have now like 2,000 different operators. And on the other hand,
you have, I don't know how many pieces of hardware there are there, it's a lot.
It's not even hundreds, it's probably thousands. Okay. And across all the edge and across all the
different things that are used at scale. Yeah, exactly. I mean, it's not just like everywhere.
Yeah. It's not a handful of TPU alternatives. Correct. It's every phone, often with many
different chips inside of it from different vendors. Right. Like it's, AI is everywhere.
It's a thing, right? Why are they all making their own chips? Like, why is everybody making
their own thing? Well, so because, was that a good thing? First of all, so Chris's philosophy on
hardware. Yeah. Right. So my philosophy is that there isn't one right solution. Right. And so I
think that, again, we're at the end of Moore's Law, specialization happens. Yeah. If you're
building, if you're training GPT-5, he wants some crazy supercomputer data center thingy.
If you're making a smart camera that runs on batteries, you want something that looks very
different. If you're building a phone, you want something that looks very different. If you have
something like a laptop, you want something that looks maybe similar, but a different scale. Right.
And so AI ends up touching all of our lives, robotics. Right. And like, lots of different
things. And so as you look into this, these have different power envelopes. There's different
trade-offs in terms of the algorithms. There's new innovations in sparsity and other data formats
and things like that. And so hardware innovation, I think is a really good thing. Right. And what
I'm interested in is unlocking that innovation. There's also like analog and quantum and like,
although the really weird stuff. Right. And so if somebody can come up with a chip that uses
analog computing and it's 100x more power efficient, I think what that would mean in terms of the
daily impact on the products we use, that'd be huge. Now, if you're building an analog computer,
you may not be a compiler specialist. Right. These are different skill sets. Right. And so
you can hire some compiler people if you're running a big company, maybe. But it turns out
these are really like exotic new generation of compilers. Like this is a different thing. Right.
And so if you take a step back out and come back to it, what is the status quo? The status quo is
that if you're Intel or you're Nvidia, you continue to keep up with the industry and you chase and,
okay, there's 1900 now. There's 2000 now. There's 2100. And you have a huge team of people that
are like trying to keep up and tune and optimize. And even when one of the big guys comes out with
a new generation of their chip, they have to go back and rewrite all these things. Right. So really,
it's only powered by having hundreds of people that are all like frantically trying to keep up.
And what that does is that keeps out the little guys. And sometimes they're not so little guys,
the big guys that are also just not in those dominant positions. And so what has been happening,
and so a lot of you talk about the rise of new exotic crazy accelerators is people have been
trying to turn this from a let's go write lots of special kernels problem into a compiler problem.
And so we and I contributed to this as well. We as an industry went into it like let's go make
this compiler problem phase, let's call it. And much of the industry is still in this phase,
by the way. So I wouldn't say this phase is over. And so the idea is to say, look, okay,
what a compiler does is it provides a much more general, extensible,
hackable interface for dealing with the general case. Right. And so within machine
learning algorithms, for example, people figured out that, hey, if I do a matrix multiplication,
I do a value, right, the classic activation function, it is way faster to do one pass over
the data and then do the value on the output, where I'm writing out the data, because really,
it's just a maximum operation, right, max is zero. And so it's an amazing optimization, take
map more value, squish together one operation, now I have map more value. Well, wait a second,
if I do that, now I just went from having, you know, two operators to three.
But now I figure out, okay, well, there's a lot of activation functions. What about
leaky value? What about like a million things that are out there, right. And so as I start fusing
these in, now I get permutations of all these algorithms, right. And so what the compiler
people said is they said, hey, cool, I will go enumerate all the algorithms and I will enumerate
all the pairs and I will actually generate a kernel for you. And I think that this has been very,
very useful for the industry. This is one of the things that powers Google TPUs,
PyTorch 2s, like rolling out really cool compiler stuff with Triton, this other technology and
things like this. And so the compiler people are kind of coming into their fore and saying like,
awesome, this is a compiler problem, we'll compiler it. Here's the problem. Not everybody's
a compiler person. I love compiler people, trust me, right, but not everybody can or should be a
compiler person. It turns out that there are people that know analog computers really well,
or they know some GPU internal architecture thing really well, or they know some crazy, sparse,
numeric, interesting algorithm that is the cusp of research, but they're not compiler people.
And so one of the challenges with this new wave of technology trying to turn everything into a
compiler is again, it is excluded a ton of people. And so you look at what does Mojo do, what does
the modular stack do is brings programmability back into this world, like it enables, I wouldn't
say normal people, but a different kind of delightful nerd that cares about numerics or
cares about hardware or cares about things like this to be able to express that in the stack and
extend the stack without having to actually go hack the compiler itself. So extend the stack on the
algorithm side, and then on the hardware side. Yeah, so again, go back to the simplest example
of int. And so both Swift and Mojo and other things like this did is we said, okay, pull magic out of
the compiler and put it in the standard library. And so what modular is doing with the engine that
we're providing and like this, this very deep technology stack, right, which goes into heterogeneous
runtimes and like a whole bunch of really cool, really cool things. This whole stack allows that
stack to be extended and hacked and changed by researchers and by hardware innovators and by
people who know things that we don't know, because you know, modular has some smart people, but we
don't have all the smart people, it turns out. What are heterogeneous runtimes? Yeah, so what is
heterogeneous, right? So heterogeneous means many different kinds of things together. And so
the simplest example you might come up with is a CPU and a GPU. And so it's a simple heterogeneous
computer to say, I will run my data loading and preprocessing and other algorithms on the CPU.
And then once I get it into the right shape, I shove it into the GPU, I do a lot of matrix
multiplications and convolutions and things like this. And I get it back out and I do some reductions
and summaries and they shove it across the wire to across the network to another machine, right?
And so you've got now what are effectively two computers, a CPU and a GPU talking to each other,
working together in a heterogeneous system. But that was 10 years ago. Okay, look at a modern
cell phone. Modern cell phone, you've got CPUs. And they're not just CPUs, there's like big dot
little CPUs. And so there's multiple different kinds of CPUs are working together. They're
multi core. You've got GPUs, you've got neural network accelerators, you got dedicated hardware
blocks for for media. So for video decode and JPEG decode and things like this. And so you've
got this massively complicated system. And this isn't just cell phones, every laptop these days is
doing the same thing. And all these blocks can run at the same time and need to be choreographed,
right? And so again, one of the cool things about machine learning is it's moving things to like
data flow graphs and higher level of abstractions and tensors and these things that it doesn't specify.
Here's how to do the algorithm. It gives the system a lot more flexibility in terms of how to
translate or map or compile it onto the system that you have. And so what you need, you know,
at the bottomest part of the layer there is a way for all these devices to talk to each other.
And so this is one thing that, you know, I'm very passionate about. I mean, you know, I'm a nerd,
but, but all these, all these machines and all these systems are effectively parallel computers
running at the same time, sending messages to each other. And so they're all fully asynchronous.
Well, this is actually a small version of the same problem you have in a data center,
right? In a data center, you now have multiple different machines, sometimes very specialized,
sometimes with GPUs or TPs and one node and sometimes with disks and other nodes. And so you
get a much larger scale, heterogeneous computer. And so what ends up happening is you have this
like multi-layer abstraction of hierarchical parallelism, hierarchical asynchronous communication
and making that again, the enemy, my enemy is complexity by getting that away from being
different specialized systems at every different part of the stack and having more consistency
and uniformity. I think we can help lift the world and make it much simpler and actually get used.
But how do you leverage like the strengths of the different specialized systems? So we're looking
inside the smartphone. Yeah. Like there's just what I don't know, five, six computers essentially
inside a smartphone. How do you, without trying to minimize the explicit, making it explicit,
which, which computer is supposed to be used for which operation?
Yeah. So there's, there's a pretty well known algorithm. And what you're doing is you're looking
at two, two factors. You're looking at the factor of sending data from one thing to another.
Right. So it takes time to get it from that side of the chip to that side of the chip
and things like this. And then you're looking at what is the time it takes to do
an operation on a particular block. So take CPUs. CPUs are fully general. They can do anything.
Right. But then you have a neural net accelerator that's really good at matrix multiplications.
Okay. And so you say, okay, well, if my workload is all matrix multiplications,
I start up, I send the data over the neural net thing, it goes and does matrix multiplications,
when it's done, it sends me back the result, all is good. Right. And so the simplest thing is just
saying, do matrix, do matrix operations over there. Right. But then you realize you get a little bit
more complicated because you can do matrix multiplications on a GPU, you can do it on
a neural net accelerator, you can do it on CPU, and they'll have different tradeoffs and costs.
And it's not just matrix multiplication. And so what you actually look at is you look at,
I have generally a graph of compute. I want to do a partitioning. I want to look at the communication,
the bisection bandwidth and like the overhead and the sending of all these different things and
build a model for this and then decide, okay, it's an optimization problem. Where do I want to
place this compute? So the old school theoretical computer science problem of scheduling. And then
how does presumably it's possible to somehow magically include auto tune into this?
Absolutely. So I mean, in my opinion, this is an opinion, this is not, not everybody would agree
with this, but in my opinion, the world benefits from simple and predictable systems at the bottom
that you can control. But then once you have a predictable execution layer, you can build
lots of different policies on top of it. Right. And so one policy can be that
the human programmer says, do that here, do that here, do that here, do that here and like
fully manually controls everything. And the systems just do it. Right. Then you quickly
get in the mode of like, I don't want to have to tell it to do it. Yeah. And so the next logical
step that people typically take, because they write some terrible heuristic, if it's a major
small location, do it over there. Or if it's floating point, do it on the GPU, if it's integer,
do it on the CPU, like something like that. Right. And, and then you then get into this
mode of like people care more and more and more and you say, okay, well, let's actually
like make the heuristic better. Let's get into auto tint. Let's actually do a search of the space
to decide, well, what is actually better? Right. Well, then you get into this problem where you
realize this is not a small space. This is a many dimensional, hyper dimensional space that you
cannot exhaustively search. So do you know of any algorithms that are good at searching very
complicated spaces for? Don't tell me you're going to turn this into a machine learning problem.
So then you turn into a machine learning problem. And then you have a space of generic algorithms
and reinforcement learning and like all these, all these, can you include that into the stack,
into the, into the module stack? Yeah. Yeah. And where does it sit? Where does it live?
Is it a separate thing or is it part of the compilation? So you start from simple and
predictable models. And so you can have full control and you can have coarse grain knobs
that like nudge, nudge systems, you don't have to do this. But if you really care about getting
the best, you know, the last ounce out of a problem, then you can use additional tools.
And they're the cool thing is you don't want to do this every time you run a model. You want to
figure out the right answer and then cash it. And once you do that, you can get,
you can say, okay, cool, I can get up and running very quickly. I can get good execution out of my
system. I can decide if something's important. And if it's important, I can go throw a bunch of
machines at it and do a big expensive search over the space using whatever technique I feel like
it's probably up to the problem. And then when I get the right answer, cool, I can just start using
it. And so you can get out of this, this trade off between, okay, am I going to like spend forever
doing a thing or do I get up and running quickly? And as a quality result, like these, these are
actually not in contention with each other if the system's designed to scale. You started and did
a little bit of a whirlwind overview of how you get the 35,000 X speed up or more over Python.
Jeremy Howard did a really great presentation about sort of the basic, like looking at the code,
here's how you get the speed up. Like you said, that's something we could probably developers
can do for their own code to see how you can get these gigantic speed up. But can you maybe speak
to the machine learning tasks in general? How do you, how do you make some of this code fast,
some specifics like what would you say is the main bottleneck for machine learning tasks? So are we
talking about metmall, matrix multiplication, how do you make that fast?
So I mean, if you just look at the Python problem, right, you can say, how do I make Python faster?
There's been a lot of people that have been working on the, okay, how do I make Python 2x faster,
10x faster or something like that, right? And there've been a ton of projects in that vein,
right? Mojo started from the, what can the hardware do? Like what is the limit of physics?
Yeah, what is the speed of light? What is it? Like how fast can this thing go? And then
how do I express that? Yeah, right. And so it wasn't, it wasn't anchored relatively on
make Python a little bit faster. It's saying, cool, I know what the hardware can do. Let's
unlock that, right? Now, when you, wait, and just say how, how gutsy that is to be in the meeting,
and as opposed to trying to see how do we get the improvement? It's like, what can the physics do?
I mean, maybe I'm a special kind of nerd, but you look at that, what is the limit of physics,
how fast can these things go, right? When you start looking at that, typically,
it ends up being a memory problem, right? And so today, particularly with these specialized
accelerators, the problem is that you can do a lot of math within them, but yet you get bottleneck
sending data back and forth to memory, whether it be local memory or distant memory or disk or
whatever it is. And that bottleneck, particularly as the training sizes get large, as you start
doing tons of inferences all over the place, like that becomes a huge bottleneck for people,
right? So again, what happened is we went through a phase of many years where people
took the special case and hand tuned it and tweaked it and tricked it out and they knew
exactly how the hardware worked and they knew the model and they made it, they made it fast.
Didn't generalize. And so you can make, you know, ResNet 50 or some, or AlexNet or something,
Inception V1, like you can, you can do that, right? Because the models are small, they fit in your
head, right? But as the models get bigger, more complicated, as the machines get more complicated,
it stops working, right? And so this is where things like kernel fusion come in. So what is
kernel fusion? This is this idea of saying, let's avoid going to memory. And let's do that by building
a new hybrid kernel and a numerical algorithm that actually keeps things in the accelerator
instead of having to write it all the way out to memory. What's happened with these accelerators
now is you get multiple levels of memory. Like in a GPU, for example, you'll have global memory
and local memory and like all these things. If you zoom way into how hardware works,
the register file is actually a memory. So the registers are like an L0 cache. And so
a lot of taking advantage of the hardware ends up being fully utilizing the full power
in all of its capability. And this has a number of problems, right? One of which is,
again, the complexity disaster, right? There's too much hardware. Even if you just say, let's look at
the chips from one line of vendor like Apple or Intel or whatever it is,
each version of the chip comes out with new features. And they change things so that it
takes more time or less time to do different things. And you can't rewrite all the software
whenever a new chip comes in, right? And so this is where you need a much more scalable approach.
And this is what Mojo and what the modular stack provides is it provides this infrastructure and
the system for factoring all this complexity and then allowing people to express algorithms.
You talk about auto tuning, for example, express algorithms in a more portable way
so that when a new chip comes out, you don't have to rewrite it all.
So to me, like, you know, I kind of joke like, what is a compiler? Well, there's many ways to
explain that. You convert thing A into thing B, and you convert source code to machine code.
Like you can talk about many, many things that compilers do. But to me, it's about a bag of tricks.
It's about a system and a framework that you can hang complexity. It's a system that can then
generalize and it can work on problems that are bigger than fit in one human's head,
right? And so what that means, what a good stack and what the modular stack provides is
the ability to walk up to it with a new problem and it'll generally work quite well.
And that's something that a lot of machine learning infrastructure and tools and
technologies don't have. Typical state of the art today is you walk up, particularly if you're
deploying, if you walk up with a new model, you try to push it through the converter and the converter
crashes. That's crazy. The state of ML tooling today is not anything that a C programmer would
ever accept, right? And it's always been this kind of flaky set of tooling that's never been
integrated well and it's been never worked together because it's not designed together.
It's built by different teams. It's built by different hardware vendors. It's built by different
systems. It's built by different internet companies that are trying to solve their
problems, right? And so that means that we get this fragmented, terrible mess of complexity.
So, I mean, the specifics of, I mean, Jeremy showed this. There's the vectorized function,
which I guess is built into Mojo. Vectorized as he showed is built into the library.
Into the library, instead of the library. Vectorized, parallelized, which vectorizes more
low level, parallelizes higher level. There's the tiling thing, which is how he demonstrated the
autotune, I think. So, think about this in like levels, hierarchical levels of abstraction, right?
And so, at the very, if you zoom all the way into a compute problem, you have one floating
point number, right? And so, then you say, okay, I want to be, I can do things one at a time
in an interpreter. It's pretty slow, right? So, I can get to doing one at a time in a compiler,
I can see. Then I can get to doing four or eight or 16 at a time with vectors. That's called
vectorization. Then you can say, hey, I have a whole bunch of different, you know, what a
multi-core computer is, it's basically a bunch of computers, right? So, they're all independent
computers that can talk to each other and they share memory. And so, now what parallelized does,
it says, okay, run multiple instances on different computers. And now they can all work together
on a problem, right? And so, what you're doing is you're saying, keep going out to the next level
out. And as you do that, how do I take advantage of this? So, tiling is a memory optimization,
right? It says, okay, let's make sure that we're keeping the data close to the compute
part of the problem, instead of sending it all back and forth through memory every, every time I
load a block. And the size of the block, size is all, that's how you get to the autotune to make
sure it's optimized. Right. Yeah. Well, so all of these, the details matter so much to get good
performance. This is another funny thing about machine learning and high performance computing
that is very different than C compilers we all grew up with, where, you know, if you get a new
version of GCC or a new version of Clang or something like that, you know, maybe something
will go 1% faster, right? And so compiler insurers will work really, really, really hard to get half
a percent out of your C code, something like that. But when you're talking about an accelerator or
an AI application, or you're talking about these kinds of algorithms, and these are things people
used to write in Fortran, for example, right? If you get it wrong, it's not 5% or 1%. It could
be 2x or 10x. Right. If you think about it, you really want to make use of the full memory you
have the cache, for example. But if you use too much space, it doesn't fit in the cache. Now you're
going to be thrashing all the way back out to main memory. And these can be 2x, 10x, major
performance differences. And so this is where getting these magic numbers and these things right
is really actually quite important. So you mentioned that Moji is a superset of Python.
Can you run Python code as if it's Mojo code? Yes. Yes. And this has two sides of it. So Mojo's not
done yet. So I'll give you a disclaimer. Mojo's not done yet. But already we see people that take
small pieces of Python code, move it over. They don't change it. And you can get 12x speedups.
Somebody was just tweeting about that yesterday, which is pretty cool. And again,
interpreters, compilers. And so without changing any code, also this is not JIT compiling or do
anything fancy. This is just basic stuff. Move it straight over. Now Mojo will continue to grow
out. And as it grows out, it will have more and more and more features. And our North Star is to be
a full superset of Python. And so you can bring over basically arbitrary Python code and have it
just work. And it may not always be 12x faster, but it should be at least as fast and way faster
in many cases. This is cool. Right. Now, it will take time to do that. And Python is a complicated
language. There's not just the obvious things, but there's also non-obvious things that are
complicated. Like we have to be able to talk to CPython packages that talk to the C API.
And there's a bunch of pieces to this. So you have to, I mean, just to make explicit,
the obvious may not be so obvious until you think about it. So to run Python code, that means you
have to run all the Python packages and libraries. So that means what? What's the relationship between
Mojo and CPython, the interpreter that presumably would be tasked with getting those packages to
work? So in the fullness of time, Mojo will solve for all the problems and you'll be able to move
Python packages over and run them in Mojo. Without the CPython. Without CPython. Someday.
Yeah. Right. It's not today, but someday. And that'll be a beautiful day because then you'll get
a whole bunch of advantages and you'll get massive speedups and things like this.
But you can do that one at a time, right? You can move packages one at a time.
Exactly. But we're not willing to wait for that. Python is too important. The ecosystem is too
broad. We want to both be able to build Mojo out. We also want to do it the right way without time,
without intense time pressure. We're obviously moving fast. And so what we do is we say, okay,
well, let's make it so you can import an arbitrary existing package, arbitrary,
including you write your own on your local disk or whatever. It's not like a standard
like an arbitrary package. And import that using CPython. Because CPython already runs all the
packages. And so what we do is we built an integration layer where we can actually use
CPython. Again, I'm practical to actually just load and use all the existing packages as they are.
The downside of that is you don't get the benefits of Mojo for those packages.
Right. And so they run as fast as they do in the traditional CPython way.
But what that does is that gives you an incremental migration path. And so if you say,
hey, cool, well, here's a, you know, the Python ecosystem is vast. I want all of it to just work.
But there's certain things that are really important. And so if I, if I'm doing weather
forecasting or something, well, I want to be able to load all the data. I want to be able to work
with it. And then I have my own crazy algorithm inside of it. Well, normally I'd write that in
C++. If I can write in Mojo and have one system that scales, well, that's way easier to work with.
Is it hard to do that to have that layer that's running CPython? Because is there some
communication back and forth? Yes, it's complicated. I mean, this is what we do. So I mean, we make it
look easy, but it is, it is complicated. But what we do is we use the CPython existing interpreter.
So it's running its own byte codes, and that's how it provides full compatibility.
And then it gives us CPython objects. And we use those objects as is. And so that way,
we're fully compatible with all the CPython objects and all the, you know, it's not just the
Python part, it's also the C packages, the C libraries underneath them, because they're often
hybrid. And so we can fully run and we're fully compatible with all that. And the way we do that
is that we have to play by the rules, right? And so we keep objects in that representation
when they're coming from that world. What's the representation that's being used in memory?
We'd have to know a lot about how the CPython interpreter works. It has, for example, reference
counting, but also different rules on how to pass pointers around and things like this. Super
low level fiddly. And it's not like Python, it's like how the interpreter works. Okay. And so that
gets all exposed out. And then you have to define wrappers around the low level C code.
Right. And so what this means is you have to know not only C, which is a different world from Python,
obviously, not only Python, but the wrappers, but the interpreter and the wrappers and the
implementation details and the conventions. And it's just this really complicated mess.
And when you do that, now suddenly you have a debugger that debugs Python,
they can't step into C code. So you have this two world problem, right? And so by pulling this all
into Mojo, what you get is you get one world. You get the ability to say, cool, I have untyped,
very dynamic, beautiful, simple code. Okay, I care about performance for whatever reason, right?
There's lots of reasons you could, you might care. And so then you add types, you can parallelize
things, you can vectorize things, you can use these techniques, which are general techniques to
solve a problem. And then you can do that by staying in the system. And if you're, you have
that one Python package is really important to you, you can move it to Mojo, you get massive
performance benefits on that. And other advantages, you know, if you like SAC types, it's nice if
they're enforced. Some people like that, right, rather than being hints. So there's other advantages
too. And then, and then you can do that incrementally as you go.
So one different perspective on this will be why Mojo instead of making C Python faster,
redesigning C Python. Yeah, well, I mean, you can argue Mojo is redesigning C Python,
but, but, but why not make C Python faster and better and other things like that. There's lots
of people working on that. So actually, there's a team at Microsoft that is really improving,
I think C Python 3.11 came out in October or something like that. And it was, you know,
15% faster, 20% faster across the board, which is pretty huge, given how mature Python is and
things like this. And so that's awesome. I love it. Doesn't run on GPU. It doesn't do AI stuff,
like it doesn't do vectors, doesn't do things. I'm 20% good, 35,000 times is better. Right. So
like they're, they're, they're, they're definitely, I'm a huge fan of that work, by the way, and it
composes well with what we're doing. And so it's not, it's not like we're fighting or anything
like that. It's actually just general, it's goodness for the world. But it's just a different path.
Right. And again, we're not working forwards from making Python a little bit better, we're working
backwards from what is the limit of physics. What's the process of porting Python code to Mojo? Is
there, what's involved in that, in the process? Is there tooling for that? Not yet. So we're missing
some basic features right now. And so we're continuing to drop out new features, like on a
weekly basis. But, you know, at the fullness of time, give us a year and a half, maybe two years.
Is it an automatable process? So when we're ready, it will be very automatable. Yes.
Is it automatable? Like is it possible to automate
in the general case, the Python to Mojo conversion? Yeah. Well, you're saying it's possible.
Well, so, and this is why, I mean, among other reasons why we use tabs.
Yes. Right. So first of all, by being a superset,
yeah, you can, it's like C versus C plus plus. Can you move C code to C plus plus?
Yes. Yeah. Right. And you move, you can move C code to C plus plus. And
then you can adopt classes, you can add, adopt templates, you can adopt other references or
whatever C plus plus features you want. After you move C to C code to C plus plus,
like you can't use templates in C. Right. And so if you leave it to C, fine, you can't use the
cool features, but it still works. Right. And C and C plus plus could work together.
And so that's the analogy. Right. Now, here, right, you, you, there's not a Python is bad and
then Mojo is good. Right. Mojo just gives you superpowers. Right. And so if you want to stay
with Python, that's cool. But the tooling should be actually very beautiful and simple
because we're doing the hard work of defining a superset. Right. So you're right. So there's
several things to say there, but also the conversion tooling should probably give you hints
as to like how you can improve the code. And then exactly once you're in the new world,
then you can build all kinds of cool tools to say like, Hey, should you adopt this feature?
Or like, and we haven't built those tools yet, but I fully expect those tools will exist. And
then you can like, you know, quote unquote modernize your code or however you want to look at it.
Right. So I mean, one of the things that I think is really interesting about Mojo is that
there have been a lot of projects to improve Python over the years.
Everything from, you know, getting Python run on the Java virtual machine,
PyPy, which is a JIT compiler, there's tons of these projects out there that have been working
on improving Python in various ways. They've fallen to one of two camps. So PyPy is a great
example of a camp that is trying to be compatible with Python. Even there, not really doesn't work
with all the C packages and stuff like that. But but they're trying to be compatible with Python.
There's also another category of these things where they're saying, well, Python is too complicated.
And, you know, I'm going to cheat on the edges. And, you know, like integers in Python can be
an arbitrary size integer. If you care about it fitting in a going fast on a register and a computer,
that's really annoying. Right. And so you can, you can choose to pass on that. Right. You can say,
well, people don't really use big integers that often. Therefore, I'm going to just not do it.
And it will be fine. Not not a Python superset. Or you can do the hard thing and say, okay,
this is Python. You can't be a superset of Python without being a superset of Python. And that's
a really hard technical problem. But it's, in my opinion, worth it. Right. And it's worth it because
it's not about anyone packages about this ecosystem. It's about what Python means for the world. And
it also means we don't want to repeat the Python 2 to Python 3 transition. Like we want,
we want people to be able to adopt this stuff quickly. And so by doing that work, we can help
lift people. Yeah, the challenge, it's really interesting technical philosophical challenge of
really making a language a superset of another language.
That's breaking my brain a little bit. Well, it paints you into corners. So again,
I'm very happy with Python. So joking, all joking aside, I think that the indentation thing is not
the actual important part of the problem. Right. But the fact that Python has amazing
dynamic metaprogramming features, and they translate to beautiful static metaprogramming
features, I think is profound. I think that's huge. Right. And so Python, I've talked with Guido
about this. It's like, it was not designed to do what we're doing. That was not the reason they
built it this way. But because they really cared and they were very thoughtful about how they designed
the language, it scales very elegantly in the space. But if you look at other languages,
for example, C and C++, right, if you're building a superset, you get stuck with the
design decisions of the subset. Right. And so, you know, C++ is way more complicated because
of C in the legacy than it would have been if they would have theoretically designed a from
scratch thing. And there's lots of people right now that are trying to make C++ better and
re-syntax C++. It's going to be great. We'll just change all the syntax. But if you do that,
now suddenly you have zero packages. You don't have compatibility. So what are the, if you could
just linger on that, what are the biggest challenges of keeping that superset status?
What are the things just struggling with? Is it all boiled down to having a big integer?
No, I mean, what are the other things like? Usually it's the, it's a long tail of weird
things. So let me, let me give you a war story. So war story in the space is you go way back in
time. Project I worked on is called Clang. Clang, what it is, is a C C++ parser, right. And when
I started working on Clang, it must have been like 2006 or something was when I, 2007, 2006,
when I first started working on it, right? It's funny how time flies. I started that project
and I'm like, okay, well, I want to build a C parser, C++ parser for LLVM. It's going to be
the word GCC is yucky. You know, this is me in earlier times. It's yucky. It's unprincipled.
It has all these weird features, like all these bugs, like it's yucky. So I'm going to build
a standard compliant C and C++ parser. It's going to be beautiful. It'll be amazing. Well,
engineered, all the cool things an engineer wants to do. And so I start implementing building it
out, building it out, building it out. And then I got to include standard IO.h.
And all of the headers in the world use all the GCC stuff.
So again, come back away from theory back to reality, right? I was at a fork on the road.
I could have built an amazingly beautiful academic thing that nobody would ever use.
Or I could say, well, it's yucky in various ways. All these design mistakes, accents of history,
the legacy at that point, GCC was like over 20 years old, which, by the way, now LLVM is over
20 years old. So it's funny how time catches up to you, right? And so you say, okay, well,
what is easier, right? I mean, as an engineer, it's actually much easier for me to go implement
long tail compatibility weird features, even if they're distasteful, and just do the hard work
and like figure it out, reverse engineer, understand what it is, write a bunch of test
cases, like try to understand behavior. It's way easier to do all that work as an engineer
than it is to go talk to all C programmers and get, argue with them and try to get them to
rewrite their code. Yeah. Right. And because that breaks a lot more things. Yeah. And you have
realities like nobody actually even understands how the code works, because it was written by
the person who quit 10 years ago, right? And so this software is kind of frustrating that way,
but it's, that's how the world works. Yeah. Unfortunately, it can never be this
perfect, beautiful thing. Well, there are, there are occasions in which you get to build,
like, you know, you invent a new data structure or something like that, or there's this beautiful
algorithm that just like makes you super happy. I love that moment. But when you're working with
people, you're working with code and dusty that code bases and things like this, right?
It's not about what's theoretically beautiful, it's about what's practical, what's real, what
people will actually use. And I don't meet a lot of people that say, I want to rewrite all my code
just for the sake of it. By the way, there could be interesting possibilities and we'll probably
talk about it where AI can help rewrite some code that might be farther out future, but it's a
really interesting one, how that could create more, be a tool in the battle against this monster
of complexity that you mentioned. You mentioned Guido, the benevolent dictator for life of Python.
What does he think about Mojo? Have you talked to him much about it?
I have talked with him about it. He found it very interesting. We actually talked with Guido
before it launched. And so he was aware of it before it went public. I have a ton of respect
for Guido for a bunch of different reasons. You talk about Waller's operator and Guido is pretty
amazing in terms of steering such a huge and diverse community and driving it forward. And
I think Python is what it is thanks to him. And so to me, it was really important starting to work
on Mojo to get his feedback and get his input and get his eyes on this. Now, a lot of what Guido
was and is, I think, and thought about is, have we not fragment the community? We don't want to
Python 2 to Python 3 thing. That was really painful for everybody involved. And so we spent
quite a bit of time talking about that and some of the tricks I learned from Swift, for example.
So in the migration from Swift, we managed to not just convert Objective-C into a slightly
prettier Objective-C, which we did. We then converted not entirely, but almost an entire
community to a completely different language. And so there's a bunch of tricks that you learn
along the way that are directly relevant to what we do. And so this is where, for example,
you leverage C Python while bringing up the new thing. That approach is, I think, proven and
comes from experience. And so Guido is very interested in, like, okay, cool. I think that
Python is really his legacy. It's his baby. I have tons of respect for that. Incidentally,
I see Mojo as a member of the Python family. We're not trying to take Python away from Guido
and from the Python community. And so to me, it's really important that we're a good member
of that community. And so I think that, again, you would have to ask Guido this, but I think
that he was very interested in this notion of, like, cool, Python gets beaten up for being slow.
So maybe there's a path out of that, right? And that, you know, if the future is Python,
right? I mean, look at the far outside case on this, right? And I'm not saying this is Guido's
perspective, but, you know, there's this path of saying, like, okay, well, suddenly Python can
suddenly go all the places it's never been able to go before. Right. And that means that Python
can go even further and can have even more impact on the world. So in some sense,
Mojo could be seen as Python 4.0. I would not say that. I think that would drive a lot of people
really crazy. Because of the PTSD of the 3.02. I'm willing to annoy people about Emax versus VIM
or about text versus spaces. That's that one. I don't know. That might be a little bit far
even for me. Like my skin may not be that thick. But the point is the step to being a super set
and allowing all of these capabilities, I think, is the evolution of a language. It feels like
an evolution of a language. So he he's interested by the ideas that you're playing with, but also
concerned about the fragmentation. So how, what are the ideas you've learned? What are you thinking
about? How do we avoid fragmenting the community? Where the the Pythonistas and the, I don't know
what to call the Mojo people. Magicians. I like it. Can coexist happily and share code and basically
just have these big code bases that are using C Python and more and more moving towards Mojo.
Well, so again, these are lessons I learned from Swift. And here we face very similar problems,
right? In Swift, you have Objective C, Super Dynamic. They're very different syntax, right?
But you're talking to people who have large scale code bases. I mean, Apple's got the biggest,
largest scale code base of Objective C code, right? And so, you know, none of the companies,
none of the iOS developers, none of the other developers want to rewrite everything all at
once. And so you want to be able to adopt things piece at a time. And so a thing that I found that
worked very well in the Swift community was saying, okay, cool. And this is when Swift was very
young. As you say, okay, you have a million line of code Objective C app. Don't rewrite it all.
But when you implement a new feature, go implement that new class using Swift.
Right. And so now this turns out is a very wonderful thing for an app developer.
But it's a huge challenge for this compiler team and the systems people that are implementing.
That's right. And this comes back to what is this trade off between doing the hard thing that
enables scale versus doing the theoretically pure and ideal thing, right? And so Swift had
adopted and built a lot of different machinery to deeply integrate with the Objective C runtime.
And we're doing the same thing with Python, right? Now, what happened in the case of Swift is that
Swift's language got more and more mature over time, right? And incidentally, Mojo is a much
simpler language than Swift in many ways. And so I think that Mojo will develop way faster than Swift
for a variety of reasons. But as the language gets more mature and parallel with that, you have
new people starting new projects, right? And so when the language is mature and somebody
is starting a new project, that's when they say, okay, cool, I'm not dealing with a million lines
of code. I'll just start and use the new thing for my whole stack. Now, the problem is, again,
you come back to where communities and where people that work together, you build new subsystem or
new feature or new thing in Swift or you build new thing in Mojo, then you want to be end up being
used on the other side, right? And so then you need to work on integration back the other way.
And so it's not just Mojo talking to Python, it's also Python talking to Mojo,
right? And so what I would love to see, and I don't want to see this next month, right? But
what I want to see over the course of time is I would love to see people that are building these
packages, like NumPy or TensorFlow or these packages that are half Python, half C++.
And if you say, okay, cool, I want to get out of this Python C++ world into a unified world,
and so I can move to Mojo, but I can't give up all my Python clients because these libraries
get used by everybody and they're not all going to switch all once and maybe never, right? Well,
so the way we should do that is we should vend Python interfaces to the Mojo types.
And that's what we did in Swift and worked great. I mean, it was a huge implementation challenge
for the compiler people, right? But there's only a dozen of those compiler people and there are
millions of users. And so it's a very expensive, capital intensive, like skill set intensive
problem. But once you solve that problem, it really helps adoption and really helps the community
progressively adopt technologies. And so I think that this approach will work quite well with the
Python and the Mojo world. So for a package ported to Mojo and then create a Python interface?
Yep. So how do you just to link on these packages, NumPy, PyTorch, and TensorFlow?
Yeah. How do they play nicely together? So is Mojo supposed to be, let's talk about the machine
learning ones. Is Mojo kind of vision to replace PyTorch and TensorFlow to incorporate it? What's
the relationship in this? All right. So let's dance. So take a step back. So I wear many hats.
So you're angling it on the Mojo side. Mojo is a programming language. And so it can help solve
the C++ Python feud that's happening. The fire Mojo got me. I'm sorry. We should be talking
modular. Yes. Yes. Okay. So the fire emoji is amazing. I love it. It's a big deal. The other
side of this is the fire emoji is in service of solving some big AI problems. And so the big AI
problems are again, this fragmentation, this hardware nightmare, this explosion of new potential,
but that's not getting felt by the industry. And so when you look at how does the modular engine
help TensorFlow and PyTorch, it's not replacing them. In fact, when I talk to people, again,
they don't like to rewrite all their code, you have people that are using a bunch of PyTorch,
a bunch of TensorFlow. They have models that they've been building over the course of many years.
And when I talk to them, there's a few exceptions, but generally they don't want to rewrite all their
code. And so what we're doing is we're saying, okay, well, you don't have to rewrite all your code.
What happens is the modular engine goes in there and goes underneath TensorFlow and PyTorch.
It's fully compatible. And it just provides better performance, better predictability,
better tooling. It's a better experience that helps lift TensorFlow and PyTorch and make them even
better. I love Python. I love TensorFlow. I love PyTorch, right? This is about making the world
better, because we need AI to go further. But if I have a process that trains a model and I have a
process that performs inference on that model, and I have the model itself, what should I do with that
in the long arc of history in terms of if I use PyTorch to train it? Should I rewrite stuff in
Mojo? Would that, if I care about performance? Oh, so I mean, again, it depends. So if you care
about performance, then writing in Mojo is going to be way better than writing in Python. But if
you look at LLM companies, for example, if you look at OpenAI, rumored, and you look at many of
the other folks that are working on many of these LLMs and other innovative machine learning models,
on the one hand, they're innovating in the data collection and the model billions of parameters
and the model architecture and the RLE or HF and the like all the all the cool things that people
are talking about. But on the other hand, they're spending a lot of time writing CUDA curls, right?
And so you say, wait a second, how much faster could all this progress go if they were not having
to handwrite all these CUDA curls? Right. And so there are a few technologies that are out there
and people have been working on this problem for a while. And they're trying to solve subsets to
the problem again, kind of fragmenting the space. And so what Mojo provides for these kinds of companies
is the ability to say, cool, I can have a unifying theory. Right. And again, the better
together the unifying theory, the the two world problem or the three world problem or the n world
problem, like this is the thing that is slowing people down. And so as we help solve this problem,
I think it'll be very helpful for making this whole cycle go faster. So obviously, we talked
about the transition from Objective C to Swift, if design this programming language. And you've
also talked quite a bit about the use of Swift for machine learning context. Why have you decided
to move away from maybe an intense focus on Swift for the machine learning context versus sort of
designing a new programming language that happens to be a super surprise.
You're saying this is an irrational set of life choices I make?
Did you go to the desert? And did you meditate on it? Okay. All right. No, it was bold and needed.
And I think, I mean, it's just bold and sometimes to take those leaps is a difficult leap to take.
Yeah. Well, so okay, I mean, I think there's a couple of different things. So
actually, I left Apple back in 2017, like January 2017. So it's been a number of years that I left
Apple. And the reason I left Apple was to do AI. Okay. So and again, I won't come on Apple and AI,
but at the time, right, I wanted to get into and understand and understand the technology,
understand the applications, the workloads. And so, okay, I'm going to go dive deep into
applied and AI and then the technology underneath it. Right. I found myself at Google.
And that was like when TPUs were waking up.
Exactly. And so I found myself at Google and Jeff Dean, who's a rock star, as you know, right?
And in 2017, TensorFlow is like really taking off and doing incredible things. And I was
attracted to Google to help them with the TPUs, right? And TPUs are an innovative hardware
accelerator platform have now, I mean, I think proven massive scale and like done incredible
things, right? And so one of the things that this led into is a bunch of different projects,
which I'll skip over, right? One of which was this Swift for TensorFlow project, right? And so
that project was a research project. And so the idea of that is say, okay, well, let's look at
innovative new programming models, where we can get a fast programming language, we can get
automatic differentiation into language, let's push the boundaries of these things in a research
setting, right? Now, that project, I think lasted two, three years. There's some really cool outcomes
of that. So one of the things that's really interesting is I published a talk at an LLVM
conference in 2018. And this seems like so long ago about graph program abstraction, which is
basically the thing that's in PyTorch 2. And so PyTorch 2 with all this Dynamo real thing,
it's all about this graph program abstraction thing from Python bytecodes. And so a lot of the
research that was done ended up pursuing and going out through the industry and influencing
things. And I think it's super exciting and awesome to see that. But the Swift for TensorFlow project
itself did not work out super well. And so there's a couple of different problems with that,
one of which is that you may have noticed Swift is not Python. There's a few people
that write Python code. Yes. And so it turns out that all of ML is pretty happy with Python.
It's actually a problem that other programming languages have as well,
that they're not Python. We'll probably maybe briefly talk about Julia,
who's a very interesting, beautiful programming language, but it's not Python.
Exactly. Well, and so like if you're saying, I'm going to solve a machine learning problem
where all the programmers are Python programmers. And you say the first thing you have to do is
switch to a different language. Well, your new thing may be good or bad or whatever,
but if it's a new thing, the adoption barrier is massive.
It's still possible.
Still possible. Yeah, absolutely. The world changes and evolves. And there's definitely
room for new and good ideas, but it just makes it so much harder. And so lesson learned,
Swift is not Python. And people are not always in search of learning a new thing for the sake
of learning a new thing. And if you want to be compatible with all the world's code, it turns
out, meet the world where it is. Right. Second thing is that, you know, a lesson learned is that
Swift as a very fast and efficient language, kind of like Mojo, but a different take on it still
really worked well with eager mode. And so eager mode is something that PyTorch does,
and it proved out really well, and it enables really expressive and dynamic and easy to debug
programming. TensorFlow at the time was not set up for that.
Let's say that was not the timing is also important in this world.
Yeah. Yeah. And TensorFlow is a good thing and it has many, many strengths, but
you could say Swift for TensorFlow is a good idea, except for the Swift and except for the
TensorFlow part. So because it's not Python and TensorFlow because it's not wasn't set up for
eager mode at the time. Yeah. That is 1.0. Exactly. And so one of the things about that is in the
context of it being a research project, I'm very happy with the fact that we built a lot of really
cool technology. We learned a lot of things. I think the ideas went on to have influence
and other systems like PyTorch. A few people use that right here. Right. And so I think that's
super cool. And for me personally, I learned so much from it. Right. And I think a lot of the
engineers that worked on it also learned a tremendous amount. And so, you know, I think that
that's just really exciting to see. And, you know, I'm sorry that the project didn't work out. I
wish it did, of course. Right. But, you know, it's a research project and so you're there to learn
from it. Well, it's interesting to think about the evolution of programming as we come up with these
whole new set of algorithms in machine learning and artificial intelligence and what's going to
win out. Because it could be a new programming language. Yeah. It could be, I mean, I just
mentioned Julia. I think there's a lot of ideas behind Julia that Mojo shares. What are your
thoughts about Julia in general? So, I will have to say that when we launched Mojo, one of the
biggest things I didn't predict was the response from the Julia community. And so, I was not,
I mean, I've, okay, let me take a step back. I've known the Julia folks for a really long time.
They were an adopter of LLVM a long time ago. They've been pushing state of the art in a bunch
of different ways. Julia is a really cool system. I had always thought of Julia as being mostly a
scientific computing focused environment. And I thought that was its focus. I neglected to
understand that one of their missions is to like help make Python work end to end.
And so, I think that was my error for not understanding that. And so, I could have been
maybe more sensitive to that. But there's major differences between what Mojo is doing
and what Julia is doing. So, as you say, Julia is not Python. And so, one of the things that
a lot of the Julia people came out and said is like, okay, well, if we put a ton of more energy
and ton more money or engineering or whatever into Julia, maybe that would be better than
starting Mojo, right? Well, I mean, maybe that's true, but it still wouldn't make Julia into Python.
So, if you've worked backwards from the goal of let's build something for Python programmers
without requiring them to relearn syntax, then Julia just isn't there, right? I mean,
that's a different thing, right? And so, if you anchor on, I love Julia and I want Julia to go
further, then you can look at it from a different lens. But the lens we were coming at was, hey,
everybody is using Python. Python isn't, syntax isn't broken. Let's take what's great about Python
and make it even better. And so, it's just a different starting point. So, I think Julia is
a great language. The community is a lovely community. They're doing really cool stuff,
but it's just a slightly different angle. But it does seem that Python is quite sticky. Is there
some philosophical almost thing you could say about why Python, by many measures, seems to be
the most popular programming language in the world? Well, I can tell you things I love about it.
Maybe that's one way to answer the question, right? So, huge package ecosystem. Super lightweight and
easy to integrate. It has very low startup time. So, what startup time? You mean like learning curve
or what? Yeah, so, if you look at certain other languages, you say like, go. And it just takes
a, like Java, for example, takes a long time to compile all the things. And then the VM starts
up and the garbage clusters kicks in and then it revs its engines and then it can plow through a
lot of internet stuff or whatever, right? Python is like scripting. It just goes, right? Python
has very low compile time. So, you're not sitting there waiting. Python integrates into notebooks
in a very elegant way that makes exploration super interactive and it's awesome, right? Python is also
it's like almost the glue of computing because it has such a simple object representation,
a lot of things plug into it. That dynamic metaprogramming thing we were talking about also
enables really expressive and beautiful APIs, right? So, there's lots of reasons that you can
look at technical things that Python has done and say like, okay, wow, this is actually a pretty
amazing thing and any one of those you can neglect. People all just talk about indentation and ignore
like the fundamental things. But then you also look at the community side, right? So, Python
owns machine learning. Machine learning is pretty big. Yeah, and it's growing. It's growing, right?
And it's growing in importance, right? And so, and there's a reputation of prestige to machine
learning to where like, if you're a new programmer, you're thinking about like,
which programming language do I use? Well, I should probably care about machine learning. Therefore,
let me try Python and kind of builds and builds and builds. And you can go back before that,
like my kids learn Python, right? Not because I'm telling them to learn Python, but because
what they were buying against you or what? Well, no, right? Well, they also learned Scratch,
right? And things like this too. But it's because Python is taught everywhere, right? Because it's
easy to learn, right? And because it's pervasive, right? Back to my day, we learned Java and C++.
I'll pale both directions. But yes, I guess Python is the main language of teaching software
engineering in schools now. Yeah. Well, and if you look at this, there's these growth cycles,
right? If you look at what causes things to become popular, and then gain in popularity,
there's reinforcing feedback loops and things like this. And I think Python has done,
again, the whole community has done a really good job of building those growth loops and help
propel the ecosystem. And I think that again, you look at what you can get done with just a few
lines of code, it's amazing. So this kind of self building loop, it's interesting to understand
because when you look at Mojo, what it stands for some of the features, it seems sort of clear that
this is a good direction for programming languages to evolve in the machine learning community.
But it's still not obvious that it will, because of this, whatever the engine of popularity,
of virality, is there something you could speak to like how, how do you get people to switch?
Yeah, well, I mean, I think that the viral growth loop is to switch people to Unicode.
I think the Unicode file extensions are what I'm betting on. I think that's going to be the thing.
Tell the kids that you could use the fire emoji and they'd be like, what?
Exactly. Well, in all seriousness, I mean, I think there's really, I'll give you two
opposite answers. One is, I hope if it's useful, if it solves problems and people care about those
problems being solved, they'll adopt the tech. That's kind of the simple answer. And when you're
looking to get tech adopted, the question is, is it solving an important problem people need solved?
And is the adoption cost low enough that they're willing to make the switch and
cut over and do the pain up front so that they can actually do it? And so hopefully,
Mojo will be that for a bunch of people and people building these hybrid packages are suffering.
It's really painful. And so I think that we have a good shot of helping people.
But the other side is, it's okay if people don't use Mojo. It's not my job to say,
everybody should do this. I'm not saying Python is bad. I hope Python,
see Python, like all these implementations, because Python ecosystem is not just see Python.
It's also a bunch of different implementations with different tradeoffs. And this ecosystem is
really powerful and exciting, as are other programming languages. It's not like TypeScript
or something is going to go away. And so there's not a winner take all thing. And so I hope that
Mojo is exciting and useful to people. But if it's not, that's also fine.
But I also wonder what the use case for why you should try Mojo would be. So practically speaking.
It seems like, so there's entertainment. There's a dopamine hit of saying, holy
shit, this is 10 times faster. This little piece of code is 10 times faster in Mojo.
Box before he gets to 35,000. Exactly. I mean, just even that, I mean,
that's the dopamine hit that every programmer sort of dreams of is the optimization. It's also the
drug that can pull you in and have you waste way too much of your life optimizing and over
optimizing, right? But so what would you see it would be like comedy. It's very hard to predict,
of course. But if you look 10 years from now, Mojo is super successful. What do you think
would be the thing where people try it and then use it regularly and it kind of grows and grows
and grows and grows? So you talk about dopamine hit. And so again, humans are not one thing.
And some people love rewriting their code and learning new things and throwing themselves
in the deep end and trying out a new thing. In my experience, most people don't. Like,
they're too busy. They have other things going on. By number, most people don't like this. I want
to rewrite all my code. But even those people, the two busy people, the people that don't actually
care about the language that just care about getting stuff done, those people do like learning new
things, right? And so you talk about the dopamine rush of 10x faster. Wow, that's cool. I want to
do that again. Well, it's also like, here's a thing I've heard about in a different domain.
And I don't have to rewrite all my code. I can learn a new trick, right? Well, that's called
growth. And so one thing that I think is cool about Mojo, and again, those will take a little bit
of time for, for example, the blog posts and the books and like all that kind of stuff to develop
and the language needs to get further along. But what we're doing, you talk about types,
like you can say, look, you can start with the world you already know, and you can progressively
learn new things and adopt them where it makes sense. If you never do that, that's cool. You're
not a bad person. If you, if you get really excited about it, want to go all the way in the deep end
and want to rewrite everything and like whatever, that's cool, right? But I think the middle path
is actually the more likely one where it's, you know, you come out with a new, a new idea and
you discover, wow, that makes my code way simpler, way more beautiful, way faster, way whatever.
And I think that's what people like. Now, if you fast forward and you said like 10 years out,
right? I can give you a very different answer on that, which is, I mean,
if you go back and look at what computers looked like 20 years ago, every 18 months, they got
faster for free, right? 2x faster every 18 months, it was like clockwork, it was, it was free,
right? You go back 10 years ago, and we entered in this world where suddenly we had multicore CPUs
and we had GPUs. And if you squint and turn your head, what are GPUs? It's just a many core,
very simple CPU thing kind of, right? And so, and 10 years ago, it was CPUs and GPUs and graphics.
Today, we have CPUs, GPUs, graphics, and AI, because it's so important because the compute
is so demanding because of the smart cameras and the watches and all the different places
that AI needs to work in our lives, it's caused this explosion of hardware. And so,
part of my thesis, part of my belief of where computing goes, if you look at 10 years from now,
is it's not going to get simpler. Physics isn't going back to where we came from.
It's only going to get weirder from here on out, right? And so, to me, the exciting part about
what we're building is it's about building that universal platform, which the world can
continue to get weird, because again, I don't think it's avoidable, it's physics,
but we can help lift people scale, do things with it, and they don't have to rewrite their code
every time a new device comes out. And I think that's pretty cool. And so, if Mojo can help with
that problem, then I think that it will be hopefully quite interesting and quite useful to
a wide range of people because there's so much potential and like there's so, you know, maybe
analog computers will become a thing or something, right? And we need to be able to get into a mode
where we can move this programming model forward, but do so in a way where we're lifting people
and growing them instead of forcing them to rewrite all their code and exploding them.
Do you think there'll be a few major libraries that go Mojo first?
Well, so, I mean, the modular engine is all Mojo. So, again, come back to like, we're not
building Mojo because it's fun, we're building Mojo because we had to dissolve these accelerators.
That's the origin story. But I mean, ones that are currently in Python.
Yeah. So, I think that a number of these projects will. And so, one of the things, again, this is
just my best guess. Like, each of the package maintainers also has, I'm sure, plenty of other
things going on. People don't like really don't like rewriting code just for the sake of rewriting
code. But sometimes, like, people are excited about like adopting a new idea.
Yeah. And it turns out that while rewriting code is generally not people's first thing,
turns out that redesigning something while you rewrite it and using a rewrite as an excuse to
redesign can lead to the 2.0 of your thing that's way better than the 1.0. And so, I have no idea.
I can't predict that. But there's a lot of these places where, again, if you have a package that
is half C and half Python, right, you just solve the pain, make it easier to move things faster,
make it easier to debug and evolve your tech. Adopting Mojo kind of makes sense to start with.
And then it gives you this opportunity to rethink these things.
So the two big gains are that there's a performance gain and then there's the portability to all kinds
of different devices. And there's safety, right? So you talk about real types. I mean, not saying
this is for everybody, but that's actually a pretty big thing, right? And so there's a bunch of
different aspects of what value Mojo provides. And so, I mean, it's funny for me. I've been working
on these kinds of technologies and tools for too many years now. But you look at Swift, right?
And we talked about Swift for TensorFlow, but Swift as a programming language, right?
Swift's now 13 years old from when I started it. So, because I started in 2010, if I remember.
And so, that project, and I was involved with it for 12 years or something, right? That project
has gone through its own really interesting story arc, right? And it's a mature, successful,
used by millions of people's system, right? Certainly not dead yet, right? But also,
going through that story arc, I learned a tremendous amount about building languages,
about building compilers, about working with community, and things like this. And so,
that experience, like I'm helping channel and bring directly in Mojo. And other systems,
same thing. Apparently, I like building and iterating and evolving things. And so, you look
at this LLVM thing I worked on 20 years ago, and you look at MLIR, right? And so, a lot of the
lessons learned in LLVM got fed into MLIR. And I think that MLIR is a way better system than
LLVM was. And Swift is a really good system. And it's amazing. But I hope that Mojo will take
the next step forward in terms of design. In terms of running Mojo, people can play with it.
What's Mojo Playground? Yeah. And from the interface perspective,
and from the hardware perspective, what's this incredible thing running on?
Yeah. So, right now, so here we are two weeks after launch. We decided that, okay, we have this
incredible set of technology that we think might be good, but we have not given it to
lots of people yet. And so, we were very conservative and said, let's put it in a workbook
so that if it crashes, we can do something about it. We can monitor and track that.
Right. And so, again, things are still super early, but we're having one person a minute
sign up with over 70,000 people two weeks in. It's kind of crazy.
So, you can sign up to Mojo Playground and you can use it in the cloud.
Yeah. In your browser. And so, what that's running on a workbook?
Yeah. What that's running on is, that's running on cloud VMs. And so, you share a machine with a
bunch of other people, but it turns out there's a bunch of them now because there's a lot of people.
And so, what you're doing is you're getting free compute and you're getting to play with
this thing in kind of a limited controlled way so that we can make sure that it doesn't
totally crash and be embarrassing. Right? Yeah.
So, now a lot of the feedback we've gotten is people want to download it around locally.
So, we're working on that right now. So, that's the goal to be able to download locally?
Yeah. Yeah. That's what everybody expects. And so, we're working on that right now.
And so, we just want to make sure that we do it right.
And I think this is one of the lessons I learned from Swift also, by the way.
Is it when we launched Swift? Gosh, it feels like forever ago. It was 2014.
And we, I mean, it was super exciting. I and we, the team had worked on Swift for a number of years
in secrecy. Okay. And we, four years into this development, roughly, of working on this thing,
at that point, about 250 people at Apple knew about it. Okay. So, it was secret.
Apple's good at secrecy. And it was a secret project. And so, we launched this at WWDC,
a bunch of hoopla and excitement, and said, developers, you're going to be able to develop
and submit apps to the App Store in three months. Okay. Well, several interesting things happened,
right? So, first of all, we learned that, A, it had a lot of bugs. It was not actually production
quality. And it was extremely stressful in terms of like, trying to get it working for a bunch of
people. And so, what happened was we went from zero to, you know, I don't know how many developers,
Apple had at the time, but a lot of developers overnight, and they ran into a lot of bugs,
and it was really embarrassing. And it was very stressful for everybody involved, right? It was
also very exciting because everybody was excited about that. The other thing I learned is that,
when that happened, roughly every software engineer who did not know about the project at Apple,
their head exploded when it was launched, because they didn't know it was coming. And so, they're
like, wait, what is this? I signed up to work for Apple because I love Objective C. Why is there a
new thing, right? And so, now, what that meant practically is that the push from launch to,
first of all, the fall, but then to 2.0 and 3.0 and like, all the way forward was super painful
for the engineering team and myself. It was very stressful. The developer community was very grumpy
about it because they're like, okay, well, wait a second, you're changing and breaking my code and
we have to fix the bugs. And it was just a lot of tension and friction on all sides.
There's a lot of technical debt in the compiler because we have to run really fast. You have to
go implement the thing and unblock the use case and do the thing. And you know it's not right,
but you never have time to go back and do it, right? And I'm very proud of the Swift team because
they've come, I mean, we, but they came so far and made so much progress over this time since
launch. It's pretty incredible and Swift is a very, very good thing, but I just don't want to do
that again, right? And so, iterate more through the development process. And so, what we're doing is
we're not launching it when it's hopefully 0.9 with no testers. We're launching it and saying it's
0.1, right? And so, we're saying expectations of saying like, okay, well, don't use this for
production, right? If you're interested in what we're doing, we'll do it in an open way and we
can do it together, but don't use it in production yet. Like, we'll get there, but let's do it the
right way. And I'm also saying we're not in a race. The thing that I want to do is build the
world's best thing, right? Because if you do it right and it lifts the industry, it doesn't matter
if it takes an extra two months. Like, two months is worth waiting. And so, doing it right and not
being overwhelmed with technical debt and things like this is like, again, war wounds, lessons
learned, whatever you want to say, I think is absolutely the right thing to do. Even though,
right now, people are very frustrated that you can't download it or it doesn't have feature X
or something like this. What have you learned in a little bit of time since it's been released
into the wild that people have been complaining about feature X or Y or Z? What have they been
complaining about? What have they been excited about? Like, almost like detailed things versus
a big vision. I think everyone would be very excited about the big vision.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, so, I mean, I've been very pleased. In fact, I mean, we've been massively
overwhelmed with response, which is a good problem to have. It's kind of like a success
disaster in a sense, right? And so, I mean, if you go back in time, when we started Modular,
which is just not yet a year and a half ago, so it's still a pretty new company, new team,
small but very good team of people, like we started with extreme conviction that there's a set of
problems that we need to solve. And if we solve it, then people will be interested in what we're
doing, right? But again, you're building in basically secret, right? You're trying to figure
it out. Creation is a messy process. You're having to go through different paths and understand what
you want to do and how to explain it. Often, when you're doing disruptive and new kinds of things,
just knowing how to explain it is super difficult, right? And so, when we launched,
we hoped people would be excited. But, you know, I'm an optimist, but I'm also like,
don't want to get ahead of myself. And so, when people found out about Mojo,
I think their heads exploded a little bit, right? And, you know, here's, I think, a pretty credible
team that has built some languages and some tools before. And so, they have some lessons learned
and are tackling some of the deep problems in the Python ecosystem and giving it the love
and attention that it should be getting. And I think people got very excited about that. And
so, if you look at that, I mean, I think people are excited about ownership and taking a step
beyond Rust, right? And there's people that are very excited about that. And there's people that
are excited about, you know, just like, I made Game of Life go 400 times faster, right? And things
like that. And that's really cool. There are people that are really excited about the, okay,
I really hate writing stuff in C++. Save me.
Well, like systems in your, they're like stepping up like, oh, yes.
So, that's me, by the way. Also, I really want to stop writing C++. But the,
I get third-person excitement when people tweet, hey, I made this code, Game of Life,
or whatever, faster. And you're like, yeah.
Yeah. And also, like, I would also say that, let me cast blame out to people who deserve
it. Sure.
These terrible people who convinced me to do some of this.
Yes.
Jeremy Howard.
That guy.
Well, he's been pushing for this kind of thing.
He's been pushing for more years.
Yeah, he's wanted this for a long, long time.
He's wanted this for years.
For people who don't know Jeremy Howard, he's like one of the most legit people in the machine
learning community. He's a grassroots. He really teaches, he's an incredible educator,
he's an incredible teacher, but also legit in terms of a machine learning engineer himself.
He's been running the fast.ai and looking, I think, for exactly what you've done.
Exactly.
And so, I mean, the first time, so I met Jeremy pretty early on, but the first time I sat up
and I'm like, this guy is ridiculous is when I was at Google and we were bringing up TPUs and
we had a whole team of people and where there was this competition called Don Bench of who can
train ImageNet fastest.
And Jeremy and one of his researchers crushed Google by not through sheer force of the amazing
amount of compute and the number of TPUs and stuff like that, that he just decided that progressive
imagery sizing was the right way to train the model and if you were epochs faster and
make the whole thing go go vroom, right?
And I'm like, this guy is incredible.
So you can say, anyways, come back to where's Mojo coming from.
Chris finally listened to Jeremy.
It's all his fault.
But there's a kind of very refreshing, pragmatic view that he has about machine learning that
I don't know if it's this mix of a desire for efficiency, but ultimately grounded and
desired to make machine learning more accessible to a lot of people.
I don't know what that is.
I guess that's coupled with efficiency and performance, but it's not just obsessed about
performance.
So a lot of AI and AI research ends up being that it has to go fast enough to get scale.
So a lot of people don't actually care about performance, particularly on the research side,
until it allows them to have a bigger data set, right?
And so suddenly now you care about distributed compute and like all these exotic HPC,
like you don't actually want to know about that.
You just want to be able to do more experiments faster and do so with bigger data sets, right?
And so Jeremy has been really pushing the limits.
And one of the things I'll say about Jeremy, and there's many things I could say about Jeremy,
because I'm a fanboy of his, but he fits in his head.
And Jeremy actually takes the time where many people don't to really dive deep into
why is the beta parameter of the atom optimizer equal to this, right?
And he'll go survey and understand what are all the activation functions in the trade-offs
and why is it that everybody that does this model pick that thing.
So the why, not just trying different values, like really what is going on here.
Right.
And so as a consequence of that, he's always, again, he makes time, but he spends time
to understand things at a depth that a lot of people don't.
And as you say, he then brings it and teaches people.
And his mission is to help lift, his website says, making AI uncool again.
Like, it's about, like, forget about the hype, it's actually practical and useful.
Let's teach people how to do this, right?
Now, the problem Jeremy struggled with is that he's pushing the envelope, right?
Research isn't about doing the thing that is staying on the happy path or the well-paid road,
right?
And so a lot of the systems today have been these really fragile, fragmented things or
special case in this happy path.
And if you fall off the happy path, you get eaten by an alligator.
So what about, so Python has this giant ecosystem of packages
and is a package repository.
Do you have ideas of how to do that well for Mojo?
Yeah.
How to do a repository of packages?
Well, so that's another really interesting problem that I knew about,
but I didn't understand how big of a problem it was.
Python packaging, a lot of people have very big pain points
and a lot of scars with Python packaging.
Oh, you mean, so there's several things to say.
Building and distributing and managing dependencies and versioning and all this stuff.
So from the perspective of if you want to create your own package.
Yes.
And then, or you want to build on top of a bunch of other people's packages
and then they get updated and things like this.
Now, I'm not an expert in this, so I don't know the answer.
I think this is one of the reasons why it's great that we work as a team and
there's other really good and smart people involved.
But one of the things I've heard from smart people who've done a lot of this
is that the packaging becomes a huge disaster when you get the Python and C together.
And so if you have this problem where you have code split between Python and C,
now not only do you have to package the C code, you have to build the C code.
C doesn't have a package manager, right?
C doesn't have a dependency versioning management system, right?
And so I'm not experienced in the state of the art
and all the different Python package managers,
but my understanding is that's a massive part of the problem.
And I think Mojo solves that part of the problem directly heads on.
Now, one of the things I think we'll do with the community,
and this isn't, again, we're not solving all the world's problems at once,
we have to be kind of focused to start with,
is that I think that we will have an opportunity to reevaluate packaging, right?
And so I think that we can come back and say,
okay, well, given the new tools and technologies
and the cool things we have that we've built up,
because we have not just syntax,
we have an entirely new compiler stack that works in a new way,
maybe there's other innovations we can bring together
and maybe we can help solve that problem.
So almost that tangent to that question from the user perspective of packages,
it was always surprising to me that it was not easier to sort of explore and find packages.
With PIP install, it feels, it's an incredible ecosystem.
It's just interesting that it wasn't made,
it's still, I think, not made easier to discover packages to do,
like search and discovery, as YouTube calls it.
Well, I mean, it's kind of funny because this is one of the challenges of these
intentionally decentralized communities.
And so I don't know what the right answer is for Python.
I mean, there are many people that were,
I don't even know the right answer for Mojo.
So there are many people that would have much more informed opinions than I do,
but it's interesting if you look at this, right?
Open source communities, you know, there's Git,
Git is a fully decentralized,
and they can do it any way they want,
but then there's GitHub, right?
And GitHub centralized, commercial in that case, right?
Thing, really help pull together and help solve some of the discovery problems
and help build a more consistent community.
And so maybe there's opportunities for something like a GitHub.
Although even GitHub, I might be wrong on this,
but the search and discovery for GitHub is not that great.
Like I still use Google search.
Yeah, well, I mean, maybe that's because GitHub doesn't want to replace Google search,
right?
And I think there is room for specialized solutions to specific problems.
I don't know, I don't know the right answer for GitHub either.
That's, they can go figure that out.
But the point is to have an interface that's usable,
that's accessible to people of all different skill levels and so on.
Well, and again, like what are the benefit of standards, right?
Standards allow you to build these next level up ecosystem,
the next level up infrastructure, the next level up things.
And so again, come back to, I hate complexity.
C plus Python is complicated.
It makes everything more difficult to deal with.
It makes it difficult to port, move code around, work with.
All these things get more complicated.
And so, I mean, I'm not an expert, but maybe Mojo can help a little bit
by helping reduce the amount of C in this ecosystem
and make it therefore scale better.
So when you kind of package this, the hybrid in nature
would be a natural fit to move to Mojo.
Which is a lot of them, by the way.
A lot of them, especially they're doing some interesting stuff computation-wise.
Let me ask you about some features.
Yeah.
So we talked about, obviously, the indentation that it's the type language
or optionally typed.
Is that the right way to say it?
It's either optionally or progressively.
Progressively.
I think, so people have very strong opinions on the right word to use.
I don't know.
I look forward to your letters.
So there's the var versus let.
But let is for constants.
Var is an optional.
Yeah, var makes it mutable, so you can reassign.
Okay, then there's function overloading.
Oh, okay, yeah.
I mean, there's a lot of source of happiness for me,
but function overloading that's, I guess, is that for performance?
Or is that, why does Python not have function overloading?
So I can speculate.
So Python is a dynamic language.
The way it works is that Python and Objective-C
are actually very similar worlds if you ignore syntax.
And so Objective-C is straight line derived from Smalltalk,
a really venerable, interesting language that much of the world has forgotten about,
but the people that remember it, love it, generally.
And the way that Smalltalk works is that every object has a dictionary in it,
and the dictionary maps from the name of a function or the name of a value within an object
to its implementation.
And so the way you call a method in Objective-C is you say,
go look up, the way I call foo is I go look up foo,
I get a pointer to the function back, and then I call it.
Okay, that's how Python works.
Right, and so now the problem with that is that
the dictionary within a Python object, all the keys are strings,
and it's a dictionary, so you can only have one entry per name.
You think it's as simple as that?
I think it's as simple as that.
And so now, why do they never fix this?
Like, why do they not change it to not be a dictionary?
Like, do other things.
Well, you don't really have to in Python because it's dynamic.
And so you can say, I get into the function,
now if I got past an integer, do some dynamic test for it,
if it's a string, go do another thing.
There's another additional challenge, which is,
even if you did support overloading, you're saying,
okay, well, here's a version of a function for integers and a function for strings.
Well, you'd have, even if you could put it in that dictionary,
you'd have to have the caller do the dispatch.
And so every time you call the function, you'd have to say,
like, is an integer a string?
And so you'd have to figure out where to do that test.
And so in a dynamic language, overloading is something you don't have to have.
But now you get into a typed language.
And in Python, if you subscript with an integer,
then you get typically one element out of a collection.
If you subscript with a range, you get a different thing out.
Right? And so often in typed languages, you'll want to be able to express the fact that,
cool, I have different behavior depending on what I actually pass into this thing.
If you can model that, it can make it safer and more predictable and faster and like all these things.
It somehow feels safe for yes, but also feels empowering.
Make it in terms of clarity, like you don't have to design whole different functions.
Yeah. Well, this is also one of the challenges with the existing Python typing systems,
is that in practice, like you take subscript, in practice, a lot of these functions,
they don't have one signature.
They actually have different behavior in different cases.
And so this is why it's difficult to retrofit this into existing Python code and make it
play well with typing. You kind of have to design for that.
Okay. So there's an interesting distinction that people that program Python might be interested in
is def versus fn. So it's two different ways to define a function.
And fn is a stricter version of def. What's the coolness that comes from the strictness?
So here you get into what is the trade off with the superset?
Yes.
So superset, you have to, or you really want to be compatible.
If you're doing a superset, you've decided compatibility with existing code
is the important thing, even if some of the decisions they made were maybe not what you'd
choose. Okay. So that means you put a lot of time in compatibility,
and it means that you get locked into decisions of the past,
even if they may not have been a good thing. Now, systems programmers typically like to control
things. And they want to make sure that, not in all cases, of course, and even systems programmers
are not one thing, but often you want predictability. And so one of the things that Python has,
for example, as you know, is that if you define a variable, you just say x equals four.
I have a variable name to x. Now I say some long, some long name equals 17.
Print out some long name. Oops, I typoed it. Right. Well, the compiler, the Python compiler
doesn't know, in all cases, what you're defining and what you're using. And did you typo the use
of it or the definition? Right. And so for people coming from type languages, again, I'm not saying
the right or wrong, but that drives them crazy because they want the compiler to tell them you
typoed the name of this thing. Right. And so what fn does is it turns on, as you say, it's a strict
mode. And so it says, okay, well, you have to actually declare, intentionally declare your
variables before you use them. That gives you more predictability, more error checking and
things like this. But you don't have to use it. And this is a way that Mojo is both compatible
because devs work the same way that devs have already always worked. But it provides a new
alternative that gives you more control and allows certain kinds of people to have a different
philosophy to be able to express that and get that. But usually, if you're writing Mojo code
from scratch, you'll be using fn. It depends. Again, it depends on your mentality. It's not
that dev is Python and fn is Mojo. Mojo has both and it loves both. It really depends on...
Time is just strict. Yeah, exactly. Are you playing around and scripting something out?
Is it a one off throwaway script? Cool. Python is great at that. I will still be using fn, but yeah.
I love strictness. Control, power. You also like suffering, right?
Yes. You go hand in hand. How many pull-ups? I've lost count at this point.
And that's cool. I love you for that. And I love other people who like strict things,
right? But I don't want to say that that's the right thing because Python is also very beautiful
for hacking around and doing stuff and research and these other cases where you may not want that.
You see, I just feel like... Maybe I'm wrong with that, but it feels like strictness
leads to faster debugging. So in terms of going from... Even on a small project from zero to
completion, it just... I guess it depends how many bugs you generate usually.
Well, so I mean, it's again lessons learned and looking at the ecosystem. It's really...
I mean, I think it's... If you study some of these languages over time, like the Ruby community,
for example. Now, Ruby is a pretty well-developed, pretty established community,
but along their path, they really invested in unit testing. So I think that the Ruby community is
really pushed forward the state-of-the-art of testing because they didn't have a type system
that caught a lot of bugs at compile time. And so you can have the best of both worlds. You
can have good testing and good types and things like this. But I thought that it was really
interesting to see how certain challenges get solved. And in Python, for example,
the interactive notebook kind of experiences and stuff like this are really amazing.
And if you typo something, it doesn't matter. It just tells you. That's fine, right? And so
I think that the tryouts are very different if you're building a large-scale production system
versus you're building and exploring in a notebook. And speaking of control, the hilarious thing, if
you look at code, I write just for myself for fun. It's like littered with asserts everywhere.
It's a kind of... Yeah, you'd like that.
Yes. It's basically saying in a dictatorial way, this should be true now. Otherwise,
everything stops. And that is the sign. I can't... I love you, man. But that is the sign of somebody
who likes control. And so, yes, I think that you'll like... And I think you'll like mojo.
Therapy session. Yes, I definitely will. Speaking of asserts, exceptions are called errors.
Why is it called errors? So, I mean, we use the same... We're the same as Python, right? But we
implement it a very different way. And so, if you look at other languages, like we'll pick on C++,
our favorite, right? C++ has a thing called zero-cost exception handling. Okay. And this is,
in my opinion, something to learn lessons from. It's a nice polite way of saying it.
And so, zero-cost exception handling, the way it works is that it's called zero-cost because
if you don't throw an exception, there's supposed to be no overhead for the non-error code. And so,
it takes the error path out of the common path. It does this by making throwing an error extremely
expensive. And so, if you actually throw an error with a C++ compiler using exceptions,
let's go look up in tables on the side and do all this stuff. And so, throwing an error could be
like 10,000 times more expensive than returning from a function, right? Also, it's called zero-cost
exceptions, but it's not zero-cost. By any stretch of the imagination, because it massively blows
out your code, your binary, it also adds a whole bunch of different paths because of
destructors and other things like that that exist in C++. And it reduces the number of
optimizations. It adds like all these effects. And so, this thing that was called zero-cost
exceptions, it really ain't. Okay. Now, if you fast forward to newer languages, and this includes
Swift and Rust and Go and now Mojo, well, and Python's a little bit different because it's
interpreted. And so, it's got a little bit of a different thing going on. But if you look at
compiled languages, many newer languages say, okay, well, let's not do that zero-cost exception
handling thing. Let's actually treat throwing an error the same as returning a variant, returning
either the normal result or an error. Now, programmers generally don't want to deal with
all the typing machinery and like pushing around a variant. And so, you use all the syntax that
Python gives us, for example, try and catch, you know, functions that raise and things like this,
you can put a raises, decorator on your functions, stuff like this. And if you want to control that,
and then the language can provide syntax for it. But under the hood, the way the computer executes it,
throwing an error is basically as fast as returning something.
I think so it's exactly the same way from a compiled perspective.
And so, this is actually, I mean, it's a fairly nerdy thing, right? Which is why I love it. But
this has a huge impact on the way you design your APIs, right? So in C++, huge communities turn
off exceptions, because the cost is just so high, right? And so the zero cost cost is so high, right?
And so that means you can't actually use exceptions in many libraries, right? And even for the people
that do use it, well, okay, how and when do you want to pay the cost? If I try to open a file,
should I throw an error? Well, what if I'm probing around looking for something, right?
I'm looking it up in many different paths. Well, if it's really slow to do that, maybe I'll add
another function that doesn't throw an error returns an error code instead. And I have two
different versions the same thing. And so it causes you to fork your APIs. And so, you know,
one of the things I learned from Apple and I so love is the art of API design is actually
really profound. I think this is something that Python's also done a pretty good job at in terms
of building out this large scale package ecosystem, it's about having standards and things like this.
And so, you know, we wouldn't want to enter a mode where, you know, there's this theoretical feature
that exists in language, but people don't use it in practice. Now, I'll also say one of the other
really cool things about this implementation approach is that it can run on GPUs and it can run
accelerators and things like this. And that standard zero cost exception thing would never
work on an accelerator. And so this is also part of how Mojo can scale all the way down to like
little embedded systems and to running on GPUs and things like that.
Can you actually say about the maybe is there some high level way to describe the challenge of
exceptions and how they work in code during compilation? So just this idea of percolating
up a thing, an error. Yeah. Yeah. So the way the way to think about it is think about a function
that doesn't return anything. Just as a simple case, right? And so you have function one calls
function two calls function three calls function four, along that call stack that are tri blocks.
Right. And so if you have function one calls function two function two has a tri block,
and then within it, it calls function three, right? Well, what happens if function three throws?
Well, actually start simpler. What happens if it returns? Well, if it returns, it's supposed to
go back out and continue executing and then fall off the bottom of the tri block and keep going
and it all's good. If the function throws, you're supposed to exit the current function
and then get into the accept clause, right? And then do whatever codes there and then keep
following on and going on. And so the way that a compiler like Mojo works is that the call to
that function, which happens in the accept block calls a function and then instead of returning
nothing, it actually returns, you know, a variant between nothing and an error. And so if you return
normally off the bottom or do return, you return nothing. And if you throw through an error, you
return the variant that is I'm an error, right? So when you get to the call, you say, okay, cool,
I called a function. Hey, I know locally I'm in a tri block. Right. And so I, I call the function
and then I check to see what it returns. A half is that error thing jump to the accept block.
And that's all done for you behind the scenes. Exactly. And so the compiler does all this for
you. And I mean, one of the things if you dig into how this stuff works in Python,
it gets a little bit more complicated because you have finally blocks, which now need, you need to
go into do some stuff. And then those can also throw and return. Wait, what? Like the stuff matters
compatibility. Like there's, there's nest them. There's with clauses. And so with clauses are
kind of like finally blocks of some special stuff going on. And so there's nesting in general,
nesting of anything nesting of functions should be illegal. It just feels like it adds a level
of complexity. I'm merely an implementer. And so this is again, one of the trade offs you get
when you decide to build a super set is you get to implement a full fidelity implementation of the
thing that you decided is good. And so, yeah, I mean, we can, we can complain about the reality
of the world and shake our fists, but it always feels like you shouldn't be a lot to do that,
like to declare functions and sudden functions inside functions. Wait, wait, wait, what happened
to Lex the Lisp guy? No, I understand that. But Lisp is what I used to do in college.
So now you've grown up.
You know, we've all done things in college. We're not part of, no, I love Lisp. I love Lisp.
Okay. Yeah, I was going to say, you're afraid of me. You're taking the whole internet.
It's, it's, uh, it worked. It worked as a joke in my head. So nested functions are
joking aside, actually really great. And for certain things, right? And so these are also
called closures. Closures are pretty cool. And you can pass callbacks. There's a lot of good
patterns. And so, uh, so speaking of which, I don't think you have, uh, nested functions
implemented yet in Mojo. Uh, we don't have Lambda syntax, but we do have, uh, there's a few things
on the roadmap that you have that it'd be cool to sort of just fly through. Cause it's interesting
to see, you know, how many features there are in a language, small and big, they have to implement.
Yeah. So first of all, there's tuple support and that has to do with some very specific
aspect of it. Like the parentheses are not parentheses that. Yeah. This is just a totally
a syntactic thing. A syntactic thing. Okay. There's, but it's cool. It's still, uh,
so keyword arguments and functions. Yeah. So this is where in Python, you can say
call a function x equals four. Yeah. And x is the name of the argument. That's a nice sort of
documenting self-documenting feature. Yeah. I mean, and again, this isn't rocket science to
implement. That's just the laundry. It's just on the list. Uh, the bigger features are things
like traits. So traits are when you want to define abstract. So when you get into typed languages,
you need the ability to write generics. And so you want to say, I want to write this function.
And now I want to work on all things that are arithmetic like. Well, what does arithmetic
like mean? Well, arithmetic like is a categorization of a bunch of types. And so it's,
again, you can define many different ways and I'm not going to go into ring theory or something.
But the, uh, you know, you can say it's arithmetic like if you can add the track
multiply, divide it, for example. Right. And so what you're saying is you're saying
there's a set of traits that apply to a broad variety of types. And so there, all these types
are arithmetic like all these tensors and floating point integer. And like there's this category
of types. And then I can define on an orthogonal access algorithms that then work against
types that have those properties. And so this is a, again, it's a widely known thing. It's been
implemented in Swift and Rust and many languages. So it's not Haskell, which is where everybody
learns, learns their tricks from. But the, but we need to implement that and that'll enable a new
level of expressivity. So classes. Yeah, classes are a big deal. It's a big deal still to be
implemented. Um, like you said, a Lambda syntax, and there's like detail stuff like whole module
import, um, support for top level code at file scope. So, and then global variables also.
So being able to have variables outside of a top level. Well, and so this comes back to the
where module came from and the fact that this is your point one, right? And so we're building,
so modular is building an AI stack, right? And an AI stack has a bunch of problems working with
hardware and writing high performance kernels and doing this kernel fusion thing I was talking about
and getting the most out of the hardware. And so we've really prioritized and built Mojo to solve
modules problem, right? Now our North Star is build out and support all the things. And so we're
making incredible progress. By the way, Mojo is only like seven months old. So that's another
interesting thing. I mean, part of the reason I wanted to mention some of these things is like,
there's a lot to do and it's pretty cool how you just kind of, sometimes you take for granted how
much there is in a programming language, how many cool features you kind of rely on. And this is
kind of a nice reminder when you lay it as a to do list. Yeah. And so I mean, but also you look into,
it's amazing how much is also there. And you take it for granted that a value, if you define it,
it will get destroyed automatically. Like that little feature itself is actually really complicated,
given the way the ownership system has to work. And the way that works within Mojo is a huge step
forward from what Rust and Swift have done. But can you say that again, when a value, when you
define it gets destroyed on the map? Yeah. So like say you have a string, right? So you just find a
string on the stack or whatever that means, like in your local function, right? And so you say,
like, whether it be in a def, and so you just say x equals hello world, right? Well, if your
string type requires you to allocate memory, then when it's destroyed, you have to deallocate it.
So in Python and Mojo, you define that with the Dell method, right? Where does that get run?
Well, it gets run sometime between the last use of the value and the end of the program.
Like in this, you now get into garbage collection, you get into like all these
long debated, you talk about religions and tradeoffs and things like this. This is a hugely
hotly contested world. If you look at C++, the way this works is that if you define a variable,
or a set of variables within a function, they get destroyed in a last in first out order.
So it's like nesting. This has a huge problem because if you define, you have a big scope,
and you define a whole bunch of values at the top, and then you use them, and then you do a whole
bunch of code that doesn't use them, they don't get destroyed until the very end of that scope.
And so this also destroys tail calls, so good functional programming, right? This has a bunch
of different impacts on, you talk about reference counting optimizations and things like this,
a bunch of very low level things. And so what Mojo does is it has a different approach on that
from any language I'm familiar with, where it destroys them as soon as possible. And by doing
that, you get better memory use, you get better predictability, you get tail calls that work,
like you get a bunch of other things, you get better ownership tracking, there's a bunch of
these very simple things that are very fundamental, that are already built in there in Mojo today,
that are the things that nobody talks about generally, but when they don't work right,
you find out and you have to complain about. Is it trivial to know
what's the soonest possible to delete a thing that's not going to be used again?
Yeah, well, I mean, it's generally trivial, it's after the last use of it. So if you just find x
as a string, and then you have some use of x somewhere in your code.
Within that scope? You mean within the scope that is accessible?
It's, yeah, exactly. So you can only use something within its scope. And so then
it doesn't wait until the end of the scope to delete it. It destroys it after the last use.
So there's kind of some very ego machine that's just sitting there and deleting.
Yeah, and it's all in the compiler, so it's not at runtime, which is also cool.
And so, yeah, and so what, and this is actually non-trivial because you have control flow.
And so it gets complicated pretty quickly. And so like getting this right was not,
Oh, so you have to insert delete like in a lot of places?
Potentially, yeah, exactly. So the compiler has to reason about this. And this is where,
again, it's experience building languages and not getting this right. So again,
you get another chance to do it and you get basic things like this, right?
But it's extremely powerful when you do that, right? And so there's a bunch of things like that
that kind of combine together. And this comes back to the, you get a chance to do it the right way,
do it the right way and make sure that every brick you put down is really good,
so that when you put more bricks on top of it, they stack up to something that's beautiful.
Well, there's also like, how many design discussions do there have to be about particular
details like implementation of particular small features? Because the features that seem small,
I bet some of them might be like really require really big design decisions.
Yeah. Well, so, I mean, let me give you another example of this. Python has a feature called
async await. So it's a new feature, I mean, in the long arc of history, it's a relatively new
feature, right? That allows way more expressive asynchronous programming. Okay. Again, this is
a Python's a beautiful thing and they did things that are great for Mojo for completely different
reasons. The reason the async await got added to Python, as far as I know, is because Python doesn't
support threads. Okay. And so Python doesn't support threads, but you want to work with
networking and other things like that that can block. I mean, Python does support threads,
it's just not its strength. And so they added this feature called async await. It's also seen
in other languages like Swift and JavaScript and many other places as well. Async await in Mojo
is amazing. Because we have a high-performance heterogeneous compute runtime underneath the
covers that then allows non-blocking IO, so you get full use of your accelerator. That's huge,
turns out. It's actually really an important part of fully utilizing the machine. You talk about
design discussions. That took a lot of discussions, right? And it probably will require more
iteration. And so my philosophy with Mojo is that, you know, we have a small team of really
good people that are pushing forward, and they're very good at the extremely deep knowing how the
compiler and runtime and all the low-level stuff works together. But they're not perfect. Same
thing as the Swift team, right? And this is where one of the reasons we released Mojo much earlier
is so we can get feedback. And we've already renamed a keyword
due to a community feedback. We use an ampersand, and now it's named in and out. We're not
renaming existing Python keywords because that breaks compatibility. We're naming things we're
adding and making sure that they are designed well. We get usage experience. We iterate and work
with the community because, again, if you scale something really fast and everybody writes all
their code and they start using it in production, then it's impossible to change. And so you want
to learn from people. You want to iterate and work on that early on. And this is where design
discussions, it's actually quite important. Could you incorporate an emoji into the language,
into the main language? Do you have a favorite one?
Why really inters the humor, like rawful, whatever, rolling on the floor laughing?
So that could be like, what would that be, the use case for that? Like throw an exception
of some sort? You should totally file a feature request. Or maybe a hard one. It has to be a
hard one. People have told me that I'm insane. I'm liking this.
I'm going to use the viral nature of the internet to actually get this past.
I mean, it's funny you come back to the flame emoji, file extension, right?
We have the option to use the flame emoji, which just even that concept cause, for example,
the people at GitHub to say, now I've seen everything.
Yeah, there's something, it's reinvigorating. It's like, oh, that's possible. That's really
cool that for some reason that makes everything else seem really exciting.
I think the world is ready for this stuff, right? And so, you know, when we have a package manager,
we'll clearly have to innovate by having the compiled package saying be the little
box with the bow on it, right? I mean, it has to be done.
It has to be done. Is there some stuff on the roadmap that you're particularly
stressed about or excited about that you're thinking about a lot?
I mean, as a today snapshot, which will be obsolete tomorrow, the lifetime stuff is really
exciting. And so lifetimes give you safe references to memory without dangling pointers.
And so this has been done in languages like Rust before. And so we have a new approach,
which is really cool. I'm very excited about that. That'll be out to the community very soon.
The traits feature is really a big deal. And so that's blocking a lot of API design.
And so there's that. I think that's really exciting.
A lot of it is these kind of table stakes features.
One of the things that is, again, also lessons learned with Swift
is that programmers in general like to add syntactic sugar.
And so it's like, oh, well, this annoying thing, like in Python, you have to spell
unbar unbar add. Why can't I just use plus? Def plus, come on. Why can't I just do that, right?
And so trivial bit of syntactic sugar, it makes sense. It's beautiful. It's obvious.
We're trying not to do that. And so for two different reasons, one of which is that, again,
lesson learned with Swift. Swift has a lot of syntactic sugar, which may be a good thing,
maybe not. I don't know. But because it's such an easy and addictive thing to do,
sugar, like make sure blood get crazy, right? Like the community will really dig into that and
want to do a lot of that. And I think it's very distracting from building the core abstractions.
The second is we want to be a good member of the Python community,
right? And so we want to work with the broader Python community. And yeah, we're pushing forward
a bunch of systems programming features, and we need to build them out to understand them.
But once we get a long ways forward, I want to make sure that we go back to the Python community
and say, okay, let's do some design reviews. Let's actually talk about this stuff. Let's figure
out how we want this stuff all to work together. And syntactic sugar just makes all that more
complicated. And yeah, list comprehension is like yet to be implemented. And my favorite,
I mean, dictionaries. Yeah, there's some basic zero point one, zero point one. But nonetheless,
it's actually still quite interesting and useful. As you mentioned, modular is very new.
Mojo is very new. It's a relatively small team. Yeah, that's building up this gigantic stack.
This incredible stack that's going to perhaps define the future of
development of our AI overlords. We just hope it will be useful.
As do all of us. So what, what have you learned from this process of building up a team? Maybe
one question is, how do you hire? Yeah, great programmers, great people that operate in this
compiler, hardware, machine learning, software, interface design space. And maybe you're a
little bit fluid in what they can do. So okay, so language design too. So building a company is
just as interesting in different ways as building a language, like different skill sets, different
things, but super interesting. And I've built a lot of teams in a lot of different places.
If you zoom in from the big problem into recruiting,
well, so here's our problem. Okay, I'll just, I'll be very straightforward about this.
We started modular with a lot of conviction about we understand the problems, we understand the
customer pain points, we need to work backwards from the suffering in the industry. And if we
solve those problems, we think it'll be useful for people. But the problem is, is that the people
we need to hire, as you say, are all these super specialized people that have jobs at big tech
big tech worlds, right? And, you know, we, I don't think we have product market fit in the way that
a normal startup does, we don't have product market fit challenges, because right now,
everybody's using AI and so many of them are suffering and they want help. And so again,
we started with strong conviction. Now, again, you have to hire and recruit the best and the
best all have jobs. And so what we've done is we said, okay, well, let's build an amazing culture.
Start with that. That's usually not something a company starts with. Usually you hire a bunch
of people and then people start fighting and it turns into a gigantic mess. And then you try to
figure out how to improve your culture later. My co-founder, Tim, in particular, is super
passionate about making sure that that's right. And we've spent a lot of time early on to make
sure that we can scale. Can you comment, sorry, before we get to the second, what makes for a
good culture? So I mean, there's many different cultures. And I have learned many things from
several very unique, almost famously unique cultures. And some of them I learned what to do
and some of them I learned what not to do. And so we want an inclusive culture. I believe in
amazing people working together. And so I've seen cultures where people, you have amazing people
and they're fighting each other. I see amazing people and they're told what to do. Like,
doubt, shout, line up and do what I say. It doesn't matter if it's the right thing. Do it.
And neither of these, and I've seen people that have no direction. They're just kind of floating
in different places. And they want to be amazing. They just don't know how. And so a lot of it starts
with have a clear vision. And so we have a clear vision of what we're doing. And so I kind of grew
up at Apple in my engineering life. And so a lot of the Apple DNA rubbed off on me. My co-founder,
Tim, also is like a strong product guy. And so what we learned is, you know, I decided Apple that
you don't work from building cool technology. You don't work from, like, come up with a cool
product and think about the features you'll have in the big checkboxes and stuff like this.
Because if you go talk to customers, they don't actually care about your product.
They don't care about your technology. What they care about is their problems.
Right? And if your product can help solve their problems, well, hey, they might be interested
in that. And so if you speak to them about their problems, if you understand and you
have compassion, you understand what people are working with, then you can work backwards to
building an amazing product. So the vision starts by defining the problem.
And then you can work backwards in solving technology. And at Apple, like it's, I think,
pretty famously said that, you know, for every, you know, there's 100 no's for every yes.
I would refine that to say that there's 100 not yet for every yes. But famously, if you go back
to the iPhone, for example, right, the iPhone one, I read, I mean, many people laughed at it
because it didn't have 3G. It didn't have copy and paste.
Right. And then a year later, okay, finally, it has 3G, but it still doesn't have copy and paste.
It's a joke. Nobody will ever use this product, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
blah, right? Well, your three had copy and paste and people stopped talking about it.
Right. And so, and so being laser focused and having conviction and understanding
what the core problems are and giving the team the space to be able to build the right tech
is really important. Also, I mean, you come back to recruiting, you have to pay well.
Right. So we have to pay industry leading salaries and have good benefits and things
like this. That's a big piece. We're a remote first company. And so we have to,
so remote first has a very strong set of pros and cons. On the one hand, you can hire people
from wherever they are and you can attract amazing talent, even if they live in
strange places or unusual places. On the other hand, you have time zones.
On the other hand, you have like everybody on the internet will fight if they don't understand
each other. And so we've had to learn how to like have a system where we actually fly people in
and we get the whole company together periodically and then we get work groups together and we plan
and execute together. And there's like an intimacy to the in-person brainstorming.
Yeah, I guess you lose, but maybe you don't. Maybe if you get to know each other well and
you trust each other, maybe you can do that. Yeah. Well, so when the pandemic first hit,
I mean, I'm curious about your experience too. The first thing I missed was having whiteboards.
Yeah. Right. Those design discussions are like, I can high intensity work through things, get
things done, work through the problem of the day, understand where you're on, figure out and solve
the problem and move forward. But we figured out ways to work around that now with
all these screen sharing and other things like that that we do. The thing I miss now
is sitting down at a lunch table with the team, the spontaneous things like the coffee bar
things and the bumping into each other and getting to know people outside of the transactional
solve a problem over Zoom thing. And I think there's just a lot of stuff that I'm not an expert
at this. I don't know who is, hopefully there's some people, but there's stuff that somehow is
missing on Zoom. Even with the whiteboard, if you look at that, if you have a room with one
person at the whiteboard and there's like three other people at a table, there's a, first of all,
there's a social aspect of that where you're just shooting the shit a little bit, almost like.
Yeah. As people just kind of coming in and yeah, that, but also while like it's a breakout
discussion that happens for like seconds at a time, maybe an inside joke or it's like this
interesting dynamic that happens that Zoom. And you're bonding. Yeah. You're bonding. You're
bonding, but through that bonding, you get the excitement. There's certain ideas that are like
complete bullshit and you'll see that in the faces of others that you won't see necessarily on Zoom.
And like something, it feels like that should be possible to do without being in person.
Well, I mean, being in person is a very different thing. It's worth it, but you can't always do it.
And so again, we're still learning and we're also learning as like humanity with this new reality,
right? But what we found is that getting people together, whether it be a team or the whole
company or whatever, is worth the expense because people work together and are happier
after that. Like there's a massive period of time where you go out and things start getting
frayed, pull people together, and then you realize that we're all working together. We see things the
same way. We work through the disagreement or the misunderstanding. We're talking across each other
and then you work much better together. And so things like that, I think are really quite important.
What about people that are kind of specialized in very different aspects of the stack working
together? What are some interesting challenges there? Yeah. Well, so I mean, I mean, there's
lots of interesting people, as you can tell, I'm, you know, hard to deal with too.
You're one of the most lovable people. So one of the, so there's different
philosophies in building teams. For me, and so some people say, hire 10x programmers,
and that's the only thing that whatever that means, right? What I believe in is building
well balanced teams. Teams that have people that are different in them. Like if you have all generals
and no troops, or all troops and no generals, or you have all people that think in one way,
and not the other way, what you get is you get a very biased and skewed and weird situation where
people end up being unhappy. And so what I like to do is I like to build teams of people where
they're not all the same. You know, we do have teams that are focused on like runtime or compiler,
GPU or whatever the specialty is, but people bring a different take and have a different
perspective. And I look for people that complement each other. And particularly if you look at
leadership teams and things like this, you don't want everybody thinking the same way. You want
people bringing different perspectives and experiences. And so I think that's really important.
That's team, but what about building a company as ambitious as modular? So what are some
interesting questions there? Oh, I mean, so many. Like, so one of the things I love about, okay, so
modular is the first company I built from scratch. One of the first things that was profound was I'm
not cleaning up somebody else's mess. Right. And so if you look at that's liberating to some degree.
It's super liberating. And also, many of the projects I've built in the past have not been
core to the product of the company. Swift is not Apple's product, right? MLIR is not Google's
revenue machine or whatever, right? It's not, it's important. But it's like working on the
accounting software for, you know, the retail giant or something, right? It's like enabling
infrastructure and technology. And so at modular, the tech we're building is here to solve people's
problems. Like it is directly the thing we're giving to people. And so this is a really big
difference. And what it means for me as a leader, but also for many of our engineers is they're
working on the thing that matters. And that's actually pretty, I mean, again, for compiler
people and things like that, that's usually not the case, right? And so that's also pretty exciting
and quite nice. But one of the ways that this manifests is it makes it easier to make decisions.
And so one of the challenges I've had in other worlds is it's like, okay, well,
community matters somehow for the goodness of the world, like, or open-source matters
theoretically, but I don't want to pay for a t-shirt, right? Or some swag. Like, well,
t-shirts cost $10 each. You can have 100 t-shirts for $1,000 to a mega-corp. $1,000 is
uncountably, can't count that low, right? But justifying it and getting a t-shirt,
by the way, if you'd like a t-shirt, I can give you a t-shirt.
Well, I would 100% like a t-shirt. Are you joking?
You can have a fire emoji t-shirt. I will treasure this.
Is that a good thing? I will pass it down to my grandchildren.
And so it's very liberating to be able to decide, I think that Lex should have a t-shirt,
right? And it becomes very simple because I like Lex.
This is awesome. So I have to ask you about the...
One of the interesting developments with large language models
is that they're able to generate code recently really well.
Yes.
To a degree that maybe I don't know if you understand, but I have... I struggle to
understand because it forces me to ask questions about the nature of programming,
of the nature of thought, because the language models are able to predict the kind of code
I was about to write so well that it makes me wonder how unique my brain is and where the
valuable ideas actually come from. How much do I contribute in terms of ingenuity, innovation,
to code, I write, or design, and that kind of stuff. When you stand on the shoulders of giants,
are you really doing anything? And what LLMs are helping you do is they help you stand on
the shoulders of giants in your program. There's mistakes. They're interesting that you learned
from, but I would love to get your opinion first high-level of what you think about this
impact of large language models when they do program synthesis, when they generate code.
I don't know where it all goes. I'm an optimist and I'm a human optimist. I think that
things I've seen are that a lot of the LLMs are really good at crushing leak code projects,
and they can reverse the link list like crazy. Well, it turns out there's a lot of
instances of that on the internet, and it's a pretty stock thing. And so if you want to see
standard questions answered, LLMs can memorize all the answers, and that can be amazing.
And also, they do generalize out from that, and so there's good work on that. But I think that
in my experience, building things, building something like you talk about mojo or you talk
about these things or you talk about building an applied solution to a problem, it's also about
working with people. It's about understanding the problem. What is the product that you want to
build? What are the use case? What are the customers? You can't just go survey all the
customers because they'll tell you that they want a faster horse. Maybe they need a car.
And so a lot of it comes into, I don't feel like we have to compete with LLMs. I think they'll
help automate a ton of the mechanical stuff out of the way. And just like, I think we all try
to scale through delegation and things like this. Delegating wrote things to an LLM, I think,
because it's extremely valuable and approach that will help us all scale and be more productive.
But I think it's a fascinating companion. But I'd say I don't think that that means that we're
going to be done with coding. Sure. But there's power in it as a companion. And from there,
I would love to zoom in on to mojo a little bit. Do you think about that? Do you think about
LLMs generating mojo code and helping sort of like, we design new programming language, it almost
seems like, man, it would be nice to sort of, almost as a way to learn how I'm supposed to use
this thing for them to be trained on some of the mojo code. So I do lead an AI company. So maybe
there'll be a mojo LLM at some point. But if your question is like, how do we make a language to be
suitable for LLMs? I think the cool thing about LLMs is you don't have to. And so if you look at
what is English or any of these other terrible languages that we as humans deal with on a
continuous basis, they're never designed for machines. And yet, they're the intermediate
representation, they're the exchange format that we humans use to get stuff done. And so these
programming languages, they're an intermediate representation between the human and the computer
or the human and the compiler, roughly, right? And so I think the LLMs will have no problem learning
whatever keyword we pick. Maybe the phi emoji is going to... Maybe that's going to break it,
it doesn't tokenize. No, the reverse of that, it will actually enable it because one of the issues
I could see with being a superset of Python is there would be confusion by the gray area. So it
would be mixing stuff. But... Well, I'm a human optimist, I'm also an LLM optimist. I think that
we'll solve that problem. But you look at that and you say, okay, well, reducing the rote thing,
right? Turns out compilers are very particular and they really want things, they really want the
indentation to be right. They really want the colon to be there on your else or else that will
complain, right? I mean, compilers can do better at this, but LLMs can totally help solve that
problem. And so I'm very happy about the new predictive coding and co-pilot type features
and things like this because I think it will all just make us more productive.
It's still messy and fuzzy and uncertain, unpredictable, so... But is there a future you
see given how big of a leap GPT-4 was, where you start to see something like LLMs inside
a compiler or no? I mean, you could do that. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I think that would be
interesting. Is that wise? Well, I mean, it would be very expensive. So compilers run fast and they're
very efficient and LLMs are currently very expensive. There's on-device LLMs and there's
other things going on and so maybe there's an answer there. I think that one of the things that I
haven't seen enough of is that... So LLMs to me are amazing when you tap into the creative potential
of the hallucinations, right? And so if you're doing creative brainstorming or creative writing
or things like that, the hallucinations work in your favor. If you're writing code that has to be
correct because you're going to ship it in production, then maybe that's not actually a feature.
And so I think that there has been research and there has been work on building
algebraic reasoning systems and figuring out more things that feel like proofs.
And so I think that there could be interesting work in terms of building more
reliable at scale systems and that could be interesting. But if you chase that rabbit hole
down, the question then becomes how do you express your intent to the machine? And so maybe you want
LLMs to provide the spec, but you have a different kind of net that then actually implements the code.
Right. So it's used as documentation and inspiration versus the actual implementation.
Yeah, potentially. Since a successful modular will be the thing that runs, I say so jokingly,
are AI overlords. But AI systems that are used across... I know it's a cliche term, but in
a lot of things. So across... So I'll joke and say like AGI should be written in Mojo.
Yeah, AGI should be written in Mojo. You're joking, but it's also possible that it's not a joke.
That a lot of the ideas behind Mojo is seems like the natural set of ideas that would enable
at scale training and inference of AI systems. So I just have to ask you about the big philosophical
question about human civilization. So folks like Eliezer Yatkowski are really concerned about the
threat of AI. Do you think about the good and the bad that can happen at scale deployment of AI systems?
Well, so I've thought a lot about it and there's a lot of different parts to this problem,
everything from job displacement to sky nut, things like this. And so you can zoom in to
sub parts of this problem. I'm not super optimistic about AGI being solved next year.
I don't think that's going to happen personally. So you have a kind of zen like calm about. Is
there's a nervousness because the leap of GBT4 seemed so big. Sure. It's like we're almost...
There's some kind of transition era period. You're thinking... Well, so I mean,
there's a couple of things going on there. One is I'm sure GPT5 and 7 and 19 will be
also huge leaps. They're also getting much more expensive to run. And so there may be a limiting
function in terms of just expense on one hand and train. That could be a limiter that slows things
down. But I think the bigger limiter outside of sky nut takes over and I don't spend any time thinking
about that because if sky nut takes over and kills us all, then I'll be dead. So I don't worry about
that. Other things worry about, I'll just focus on. I'll focus and not worry about that one.
But I think that the other thing I'd say is that AI moves quickly, but humans move slowly and we
adapt slowly. And so what I expect to happen is just like any technology diffusion, the promise
and then the application takes time to roll out. And so I think that I'm not even too worried about
autonomous cars defining away all the taxi drivers. Remember, autonomy is supposed to be
solved by 2020? Boy, do I remember. And so I think that on the one hand we can see amazing
progress, but on the other hand we can see that the reality is a little bit more complicated
and it may take longer to roll out than you might expect. Well, that's in the physical space. I do
think in the digital space is the stuff that's built on top of LLMs that runs
millions of apps that could be built on top of them. And that could be run on millions of devices,
millions of types of devices. I just think that the rapid effect it has on human civilization could
be truly transformative to it. And there I think it depends on are you an optimist or a pessimist
or a masochist? Just to clarify, optimist about human civilization. Me too. And so I look at that
as saying, okay, cool, what will AI do? And so some people say, oh my god, is it going to destroy
us all? How do we prevent that? I kind of look at it from a, is it going to unlock us all?
You talk about coding, is it going to make so I don't have to do all the repetitive stuff?
Well, suddenly that's a very optimistic way to look at it. And you look at what a lot of these
technologies have done to improve our lives. And I want that to go faster.
What do you think the future of programming looks like in the next 10, 20, 30, 50 years
with LLMs and with Mojo with modular, like your vision for devices, the hardware to the
compilers to this, to the different stacks of software. Yeah. Well, so what I want, I mean,
coming back to my arch nemesis, it's complexity. So again, me being the optimist, if we drive down
complexity, we can make these tools, these technologies, these cool hardware widgets
accessible to way more people. And so what I'd love to see is more personalized experiences,
more things, the research getting into production instead of being lost at NeurIPS.
Right. And like these things that impact people's lives by entering products. And so one of the
things that I'm a little bit concerned about is right now, the big companies are investing huge
amounts of money and are driving the top line of AI capability forward really quickly. But if it
means that you have to have $100 million to train a model or more $100 billion, right? Well, that's
going to make it very concentrated with very few people in the world that can actually do this
stuff. I would much rather see lots of people across the industry be able to participate and use
this, right? And you look at this, you know, I mean, a lot of great research has been done
in the health world and looking at like detecting pathologies and doing radiology with AI and like
doing all these things. Well, the problem today is that to deploy and build these systems, you have
to be an expert in radiology and an expert in AI. And if we can break down the barriers so that more
people can use AI techniques, it's more like programming Python, which roughly everybody
can do if they want to, right? Then I think that we'll get a lot more practical application of
these techniques and a lot more niche year, cool, but narrower demands. And I think that's
that's going to be really cool. Do you think we'll have more or less programmers in the world than
now? Well, so I think we'll have more more programmers, but they may not consider themselves
to be programmers. That'd be a different name for you, right? I mean, do you consider somebody
that uses, you know, I think that arguably the most popular programming language is Excel?
Yeah. Right? Yep. And so do they consider themselves to be programmers? Maybe not. I mean,
some of them make crazy macros and stuff like that. But but but what what you mentioned, Steve
Jobs, is it's the bicycle for the mind that allows you to go faster, right? And so I think that as
we look forward, right? What is AI? I look at it as hopefully a new programming paradigm. It's like
object-oriented programming, right? If you want to write a cat to texture, you don't use for loops.
Turns out that's not the right tool for the job, right? And so right now, unfortunately,
because I mean, it's not unfortunate, but it's just kind of where where things are. AI is this
weird, different thing that's not integrated into programming languages and normal tool chains and
all the technology is really weird and doesn't work right. And you have to babysit it. And
every time you switch hardware, it's different. It shouldn't be that way. When you change that,
when you fix that, suddenly, again, the tools technologies can be way easier to use. You
can start using them for many more things. And so that's that's why I would be excited about.
What kind of advice could you give to somebody in high school right now or maybe early college
who's curious about programming and feeling like the world is changing really quickly here?
Yeah. Well, what kind of stuff to learn? What kind of stuff to work on? Should they finish college?
Should they go work at a company? Should they build a thing? What do you think?
Well, so I mean, one of the things I'd say is that you'll be most successful if you work on
something you're excited by. And so don't get the book and read the book cover to cover and study
and memorize and recite and flashcard and go build something. Like go solve a problem. Go
build the thing that you want to exist. Go build an app. Go train a model. Like go build something
and actually use it and set a goal for yourself. And if you do that, then you'll, you know,
there's a success. There's the adrenaline rush. There's the achievement. There's the unlock that
I think is where, you know, if you keep setting goals and you keep doing things and building
things, learning by building is really powerful. In terms of career advice, I mean,
everybody's different. It's very hard to give generalized advice. I'll speak as a compiler
nerd. If everybody's going left, sometimes it's pretty cool to go right. And so just because
everybody's doing a thing, it doesn't mean you have to do the same thing and follow the herd.
In fact, I think that sometimes the most exciting paths through life lead to being curious about
things that nobody else actually focuses on, right? And turns out that understanding deeply
parts of the problem that people want to take for granted makes you extremely valuable and
specialized in ways that the herd is not. And so again, I mean, there's lots of rooms for
specialization, lots of rooms for generalists. There's lots of room for different kinds and
parts of the problem. But I think that it's, you know, just because everybody's doing one thing
doesn't mean you should necessarily do it. And now the herd is using Python. So if you want to
be a rebel, go check out Mojo and help Chris and the rest of the world fight the arch nemesis
of complexity, because simple is beautiful. There you go. Because you're an incredible person.
You've been so kind to me ever since we met. You've been extremely supportive. I'm forever
grateful for that. Thank you for being who you are, for being legit, for being kind, for fighting
this really interesting problem of how to make AI accessible to a huge number of people, a huge
number of devices. Yeah. Well, so Lex, you're a pretty special person too, right? And so I think
that, you know, one of the funny things about you is that besides being curious and pretty damn
smart, you're actually willing to push on things. And I think that you've got an agenda to like
make the world think, which I think is a pretty good agenda. It's a pretty good one. Thank you so
much for talking, Chris. Yeah, thanks, Lex. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Chris
Ladner. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now,
let me leave you some words from Isaac Asimov. I do not fear computers. I fear the lack of them.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.